1. The first portion of this book is missing in all the MSS.,
showing thus that they are all derived from the same archetype.
That there does exist a lacuna has been the almost unanimous
opinion of scholars for many centuries. Raphael Volaterranus (in
the year 1506) wrote: Opinio grammaticorum nonnullorum est
primam vitam Caesaris haud integram reperiri, cum verisimile
non sit ipsius incunabula generis tacuisse adeoque ex abrupto exorsum esse, cum ceterorum omnium, etiam ignobilium, altius
originem repetierit; itaque 'Iulius Caesar' in principio addita
esse verba." A passage in Servius (ad Verg. Aen. 6. 799) evidently alludes to a portion of the Life which we do not now
possess. It runs as follows: Suetonius ait in vita Caesaris responsa esse data per totum orbem nasci invictum imperatorem.
The whole Life seems to have been known to Joannes Laurentius
Lydus in the sixth century (Teuffel, § 342. 8), as appears from a
passage of his work Περὶ μηνῶν, quoted by Roth, p. 286, and a
paragraph in his other treatise Περὶ ἀρχῶν τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων
πολιτείας. For a full discussion of the portion supposed
to be lost, cf. Roth, Praef. pp. viii-xi. Mr. Simcox, who is always ingenious if nothing else, puts forward the suggestion in
his History of Latin Literature, that Suetonius purposely omitted the details of Caesar's boyhood as being trite and already
many times repeated, and hence likely to bore the reader!
flamen Dialis destinatus: destinatus = designatus, as in Livy, 10.
22. 1, and Tac. Annal. 1. 3. In § 27 Suetonius uses destinatam
as an equivalent for sponsam. Cicero (de Leg. 2. 8) expresses
the distinction between sacerdotes, pontifices, and flamines in
these words: Divisque aliis alii sacerdotes, omnibus pontifices,
singulis FLAMINES sunto. Originally there were only three (flamines maiores), -the flamen Dialis, the flamen Martialis, and the
flamen Quirinalis (Plutarch, Numa, 7). Later, twelve more were
added (flamines minores), chosen from the plebeians. The flamen Pomonalis was the flamen of the least importance. Though
Gellius gives a different account, the flamines were probably in
later times chosen by the comitia tributa. The word flamen is qs. flag-men (flag-min), from the Latin base flag, to
burn, seen in flagro, flamma (flag-ma), φλέγειν, Skt. bhraj,
all from BHARG, to shine, to which are to be assigned the English 'bright,' and the Middle High German 'berht.' Cf. Fick, I.
152. Hence flamen is "the burner of the sacrifice," or "the
burner of the incense." Cf. the Roman name Flaminius.
On the choice of the flamines cf. Tac. Annal. 4. 16, and Gell.
10. 15. The technical term is flaminem capere, on which cf.
Gell. 1. 12. 15: Sed flamines quoque Diales, item pontifices et ausures 'capi' dicebantur. dimissa Cossutia: cf. Calig. § 25:
matrimonia contraxerit turpius an dimiserit. desponsata:
Post Aug. word for desponsa which is twice used in Claud. § 27.
-Cinnae quater consulis: i.e., who was altogether four times
consul. An instance of Suetonian brevity of expression. See
Introd. 8. repudiaret: repudium, as contrasted with divortium, refers to the breaking off of an engagement to marry (cf.
Dig. 50. 16. 191), but repudiaret in the present passage is equivalent to divortium faceret, and so in Claud. § 26. In § 21, repudiare is used of the woman's act, repudiato sponso. Velleius tells
us (2. 41) that Marcus Piso, a consular, was less independent
under similar circumstances, divorcing his wife Annia, who had
formerly been married to Cinna, in order to gain Sulla's favor.
Hase instances the willingness of the first Napoleon to divorce
his wife for reasons of state; but the parallel cannot be considered close.diversarum partium habebatur : "he was classed
with the opposite faction." In Aug. § 12, secta is used of a political faction, as factio infra § 11. discedere e medio: less
common than excedere (Ter. Phorm. 5. 8. 74), recedere (Cic. Rosc.
Am. 38, § 112), or abire (Ter. Phorm. 5.9.30). E medio (also
de medio) is opposed in meaning to in medium, for which cf.
Cic. Verr. 2. 2. 71, ad Fam. 15. 27. 6, and De Offic. 1. 7: communes utilitates in medium afferre. So also in medio, as tabulae
sunt in medio, Cic. Verr. 2. 2. 42. Suet. uses in medium conferre as a gambler's phrase, to " put into the pot," in Aug. § 71
(quoted from a letter of Aug.). — quartanae: sc. febris, as in
Juv. 4. 57. inquisitoribus: their leader, Cornelius Phagita, is
mentioned in § 74. See also Plut. Caes. 1, τὸν ἡγεμόνα Κορνήλιον πείσας. — per virgines vestales: Plutarch in his life
of Numa mentions their privileges and prerogatives as (1) the
right of making a will during the father's life; (2) the rights of
a mother of three children; (3) the honor of the fasces; (4) the
right of saving the life of any criminal whom they met on the
way to execution, provided the meeting was accidental. They
appear also to have had some especial rights of intercession in
behalf of accused persons. Cf. with Hase, Cic. pro Font. 21;
Tacit. Annal. 11. 32; and id. Histor. 3. 81. See also Tib.
§ 2 fin., and Vitell. § 16. Mamercum Aemilium: for this inversion of a proper name, see Introd. 10. a. propinquos et affines : συγγενεῖς καὶ κηδεσταί: propinqui are blood relations, affines connections by marriage. The names of affines
are: socer, socrus, gener, nurus, vitricus, noverca, privignus,
privigna, levir, glos.optimatium: optimates are opposed to
populares. Cf. Cic. cited by Nonius, 342. 31 : res publica ex tribus generibus illis, regali et optumati et populari confusa.
nam Caesari multos Marios inesse : Plutarch in his life of Caesar
repeats the same saying. Cf. infra § 45, where Sulla warns his
friends ut male praecinctum puerum caverent. Macrobius (S. 2.
3. 9) gives the words of Sulla cave tibi illum puerum male praecinctum as said to Pompey. So Dio Cass. 43. 43, who gives
us a similar saying of Cicero : οὐκ ἂν πότε προσεδόκησα
τὸν κακῶς οὕτω ζωνύμενον Πομπηΐον κρατήσειν.
2. Stipendia prima in Asia fecit. "He went through his first
campaign in Asia, on the staff of M. Thermus." So Tacitus of
Agricola (Agric. 5): prima castrorum rudimenta in Britannia.
Stipendium is the pay of a soldier, sometimes fully styled stipendium militare (Livy, 4. 60. 5). Somewhat more common than
stipendia facere (for which see Sallust, Jug. 63) is stipendia
merere or emerere. Tacitus by a metonymy takes stipendium directly in the sense of " a campaign" (Annal. 1. 17). Reliqua
militia: may be taken either as a nominative or an ablative, but
better as an ablative in order that the subject both of fuit and
of donatus est may be the same, i.e., Caesar. in expugnatione Mytilenarum. Cf. Plut. Lucull. 4, and the Epitome of
Livy, lxxxix. After the defeat of Mithridates, Mytilenae was
the only city that still continued to resist the Romans.corona
civica: a chaplet of oak leaves presented to the soldier who had
saved in battle the life of a fellow-citizen. It ranked second in
honor among the coronae, the most highly esteemed being the
corona obsidionalis given to the general who relieved a beleaguered town, and made of grass (hence graminea). Other
crowns were the corona navalis (gold), the corona muralis (gold),
the corona castrensis (gold), the corona triumphalis (bay), the
corona ovalis (myrtle), and the corona oleagina (olive). See
Gell. 5. 6, for a full account.
3. Meruit et. See Introd. 17. Servilio. With his son,
Caesar held the consulate in B.C. 47. Cf. Plut. Caes. 37; and
Aug. § 62. brevi tempore: i.e., returning to Rome before the
end of the year. novae dissensionis: cf. Flor. 3. 23.
4. repetundarum postulavit sc. pecuniarum, " impeached him
for bribery." A Post Aug. construction for de repetundis (pecuniis) postulavit. Cf. Cic. ad Q. Frat. 3. 1. 5, qui iam de maiestate
postulavit. Suet. again uses the genitive in Aug. § 56: qui postulabatur iniuriarum. Pecuniae repetundae is a technical term
(see Introd. 1), originally used of money extorted by an official and to be returned; later, of money extorted as a bribe.
See L. and S. Lex. s. v. repeto. For the ellipsis of pecuniarum cf.
Domit. § 8: auctor fuit aedilem sordidum repetundarum accusandi
The plural pecuniarum is legal phraseology, exactly like our
"moneys." Apollonio Moloni. Apollonius Molo was also one
of the instructors of Cicero, who mentions him (with a pun on his
name Molo) in one of his letters to Atticus (2. 1. 9). Val. Max.
2. 2, speaks of Molo rhetor qui studia M. Ciceronis acuit.
Plut. (Cic. 4) mentions Apollonius among the teachers of
Cicero. See also Quint. Inst. 12. 6. 7: M. Tullius.... in
Asiam navigavit seque et aliis sine dubio eloquentiae ac sapientiae
magistris, sed praecipue tamen Apollonio Moloni quem Romae
quoque audierat, Rhodi rursus formandum velut recoquendum
dedit. Pharmacussam insulam. S. W. of Miletus, and now
called Farmako. There were two small islands of the same name
off the coast of Attica, near Salamis. See Strabo, 9. 1. 13.-а
praedonibus: the pirates who swarmed in the Mediterranean
at this time as the direct result of the Mithridatic wars, in which
so many thousands of the inhabitants of Asia Minor were driven
from their homes and forced into lawless pursuits. A parallel
may be found in the condition of France at the time of the Hundred Years' War, when the atrocities of the Écorcheurs led to the
historically important Ordinance of Orleans (1439), and the creation of a standing army to suppress banditti. So the Mediterranean pirates were at last suppressed by Pompey under the
ample powers given him by the Gabinian Law (B.C. 67); but
the lawlessness continued so long as to make every voyage dangerous. So numerous were the pirates that they formed a powerful community, living in magnificence, with regular depots for
disposing of their prisoners and plunder, and with power enough
practically to control the waters between Italy and Asia Minor.
"The oars of the galleys of their commanders were plated with
silver; their cabins were hung with gorgeous tapestry. They
had bands of music to play at their triumphs. They had a religion of their own, an oriental medley called the Mysteries of
Mithras. They had captured and pillaged four hundred considerable towns, and had spoiled the temples of the Grecian gods."
At one time they even ventured into the harbor of Ostia and
burned the ships that were lying there. It is to them that the
pirates of modern times owe the practice of compelling their
useless captives to "walk the plank." Some notion of their
numbers may be gathered from the fact that Pompey in his work
of suppressing them, destroyed 1300 pirate ships and took over
22,000 prisoners. Over 10,000 of the pirates fell in battle. See
Mommsen, Bk. V. ch. 4. The name Cilix passed into the
Latin language as a synonym for praedo, just as Threx became an equivalent for gladiator (Hor. Epod. 5. 14, and Calig.
§ 35), and as the Greeks used the word Κάρ sometimes as
equivalent to δοῦλος and sometimes to ξένος (Thucyd. 1. 121;
Polyb. 10. 32. 11). Hence the proverbs θύραζε, Κᾶρες,
οὐκέτ᾽ ᾿Ανθεστήρια,—“ Out, slaves, the holidays are over!"-
and ἐν τῷ Καρὶ κινδυνεύειν (Eurip. Cycl. 647). See also
Valck. Herodot. 5. 66, and the interesting chapter in Dr. Taylor's Words and Places, pp. 275-310. non sine summa indignatione. Plutarch's account is very characteristic of Caesar:
"He was taken near the island of Pharmacussa by some of the
pirates who at that time with large fleets of ships and innumerable smaller vessels infested the seas everywhere. When these
men at first demanded of him twenty talents for his ransom, he
laughed at them for not understanding the value of their prisoner,
and of his own accord promised to give them fifty. He presently despatched those about him to several places to raise the
money, till at last he was left among a set of the most ferocious
people in the world, the Cilicians, with only one friend and two
attendants. Yet he made so little of them, that when he had a
desire to sleep he would send to them and command them to
make no noise. For thirty-eight days, with perfect nonchalance,
he amused himself by joining in their diversions and games, as if
they had been his attendants rather than his keepers. He wrote
verses and orations, and made the pirates his audience, and if
they did not admire, he called them to their faces ignorant
and barbarous, and would often in raillery threaten to hang
them. They were greatly taken with this, and set down his
bluntness of speech to a sort of simplicity and playfulness."
-pecunias quibus redimeretur. Velleius (2. 42) says that
Caesar's ransom was paid out of public funds. e vestigio.
"Immediately," and = statim. So Caes. Bell. Civ. 2. 25. The
simple ablative is also used adverbially: so, urbs capta eodem
vestigio videretur, id. ib. 2. 7, and cf. vestigio temporis, id. ib.
2. 26, and in vestigio temporis, id. Bell. Gall. 7. 25.-supplicio quod saepe illis minatus. See § 74, and Vell. 2. 42, regarding this punishment. inter iocum. Less common than per iocum (see Aug. § 77, note), and much rarer than the simple ablative ioco, for which cf. serio iocove, Nero § 25, and vel serio vel
ioco, Aug. § 53. Opposed to extra iocum, a phrase to be compared with the extra sortem, § 20. In the present passage some
edd. read per iocum, on which see Hase ad h. 1.-ne desidere
etc.
"Lest he should appear to be inactive at a time of peril
to the allies." - Nutantis ac dubias civitates retinuit in fide:
"he held the wavering and uncertain states to their allegiance."
5. cuius vim Sulla diminuerat. Cf. Vell. 2. 30; Epitome of
Livy, lxxxix.; Sallust, Hist. 1. 41. 11 (Dietsch); Tac. Annal. 3. 27;
and the excellent account in Mommsen, Bk. IV. ch. 10. -enixissime: this superlative form is very rare. See Introd. 3.-
et qui: sc. iis as the antecedent of qui, and dative after reditum
confecit.post necem : necem here involves no idea of violence
11.
and = mortem. A very rare usage, and found only in post-Aug.
Latin. Lewis and Short cite Just. 42. 1. I, post necem Mithridatis, which is to be understood as referring to the Parthian Mithridates, and not to the King of Pontus who died by his own hand.
-rogatione Plotia: 'rogatio' is properly distinguished from
'lex,' according to Festus, in that it is a bill relating to particular individuals rather than the whole people; or to particular instances, while 'lex' is general in its scope. This distinction fits
the present passage. A rogatio is so called because the people
is asked whether it will decree this or that enactment. The formula of rogatio is given by Gell. 5. 19. 9. The word occurs
frequently in the following technical expressions: rogationem jubere, to pass a bill; antiquare r., to reject it, -i.e., to leave the
law in its ancient state (Paul. ex Fest. p. 26, Müll.). Hence
the two tablets given to the voter were inscribed respectively
A. (antiquo), and V. R. (uti rogas). The proposer of a law is
said ferre rogationem, ' to get it passed.' Cf. also, legem rogare,
' to propose a law'; derogare, 'to repeal some portion of it';
abrogare, 'to repeal it entire'; obrogare, 'to propose a law in
opposition to it'; surrogare, 'to propose a substitute'. -super
ea re: super = de. See Introd. 16. contionem: syncopated
from conventionem, and originally a public meeting, then the
speech delivered before a contio. As a rhetorical term it is applied to the imaginary discourses attributed by historical writers
to famous men, as the speeches of Agricola and Calgacus. given
by Tac. Agric. 30-34, and the many famous examples in Thucydides and Livy. Contionor is a favorite word of Suet. See §§ 33.,
55., 85. and Aug. §§ 27., 84.
6. amitam. The wife of the elder Marius. On the practice
of delivering funeral orations over matrons, see Livy, 5.50 7.
Amita is an aunt on the father's side; matertera, on the mother's.
The English 'aunt' comes from amita through the French tante,
corrupted from the earlier ante. The m of amita has changed to
n before the t exactly as in the word ant from the A. S. aemete,
though retained in the doublet emmet. Skeat cites by way of
illustration the popular Eng. abbreviation' Hants' for 'Hampshire.' See Mätzner, Eng. Gram. I. 123. With amita cf. the
O. H. G. ammd (mother), the mod. Germ. amme (nurse), Gael.
am, Languedocian and Basque ama (mother), and Skt. ambd.
The Spanish and Portuguese ama (housewife) and amo (dominus)
are doubtless the same, though Knapp would make them Semitic
survivals from the Phoenician aтта. See Diez, Etymologisches
Wörterbuch der Romanischen Sprachen (Bonn, 1878). Prof.
Knapp's view is justly criticised by Dr. H. A. Todd in Mod.
Language Notes, Nov. 1886.-mater : "her mother," i.e.,
Marcia, married to C. Caesar, the grandfather of Julius. -plurimum pollent. So Cic. Brut. 51. 190; and plus pollet, id. Offic.
2. 9. 34. For this sentiment Hase quotes Hor. O. 3. 1. 5.
Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis.
-caerimonia deorum: "the majesty of monarchs and the
sanctity of gods." In this sense caerimonia is rare. The word
is popularly derived from Caere, the Etruscan town (see Taylor,
Words and Places, p. 304); but is better assigned directly to
KAR, of creo (= facere), κραίνω (Curt. I. 189), and the Skt.
karman, a rite. — adulteratam opinatus a Publio Clodio. It was
with regard to this scandal that Caesar uttered his famous remark, given in § 74, which see. On Clodius, who is one of the
most remarkable characters in Roman history, see the letters of
Cicero ad Atticum, 1. 13; id. 16; ad Fam. 2. 6; the oration for
Milo; Merivale, I. 144-152; Long, III. c. xvii., Mommsen, Bk.
V., and Professor Beesly's article on Clodius. Also Froude's
Caesar, pp. 154-158 (ch. xii.). de pollutis sacris. The festival was that of the Bona Dea, called also Fauna and Fatua,
revealing prophecies to women only, as Faunus only to males.
Cf. Plutarch, Caes. 9, and Nettleship, Essays, pp. 50-54. The
festival was held annually on the Kalends of May.
7. ulterior Hispania: i.e., Hispania trans Iberum.
conventus circumiret. The conventus was a gathering of all the Roman
inhabitants of a provincial district, something like the hundredmoot of the early English, presided over by the proconsul, who
from their number selected judices to try the cases presented by
litigants. The proconsul pronounced judgment according to the
verdict of the judices. Cf. Caes. Bell. Gall. 1. 54, and 5. 2. —
Gadis. Now Cadiz, and a town of remarkable antiquity. It was
one of the outposts of Phoenician commerce, which studded the
shores of the Mediterranean with settlements, and extended
down the West African coast as far as the mouth of the Senegal.
The name is corrupted from Gadeira and derived from gadir, "a
hedge," which appears possibly in the name of the Aegates near
Sicily, and in the familiar names of Scripture, Geder and Gadara.
It marks a fortified place, and so presents a striking analogy
with the English 'town' from tún, tynan, 'to enclose,' and the
O. H. G zun, 'a hedge.' Cognate with this is the Irish dun,
'a fortress,' found in its lengthened Latinized form dunum in so
many Keltic place-names, e.g. Camalodunum, Augustodunum,
Lugdunum, etc. (In the text after the words occasione in urbe,
the following passage has been omitted: "Etiam confusum eum
somnio proximae noctis (nam visus erat per quietem stuprum
matri intulisse) coiectores ad amplissimam spem incitaverunt,
arbitrium terrarum orbis portendi interpretantes quando mater
quam subiectam sibi vidisset non alia esset quam terra quae omnium parens haberetur."-Plutarch says that this dream was on
the night preceding the crossing of the Rubicon.]
8. Decedens: in administrative language, a technical term for
retiring from one's province; in military language it means "to
retreat." Usually provincia is expressed either in the simple
ablative or with de, ex, or (rarely) ab. Cf. Livy, 39. 3.-ad
audendum aliquid. Cf. Juvenal, 1. 73: aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris et carcere dignum.
9. maiora mox in urbe molitus est.
Notice the alliteration and
see Introduction, 5. - paucos dies: loosely used for paucis diebus or intra paucos dies, the time being properly regarded as that
in which the suspicion arose. Roby, 1182. Conversely, the ablative construction is not infrequently used of duration, though an
attempt has been made by some scholars to discover a fine-spun,
subtle distinction when it is so used instead of the accusative. Cf.
Cic. de Nat. Deor. 2. 16. Ordo autem siderum et in omni aeternitate constantia; Roby, 1184; and Dumesnil on Cic. de Leg. 1.
8.-post designationem consulatus : Cf. annua designatio, Tac.
Annal. 2. 36. The consuls were elected at the comitia centuriata
in July. From this time until their installation on the Kalends
of the following January they were styled consules designati and
received certain special honors and distinctions, among them
being the right of giving their vote first in the Senate, except as
precedence was modified by Augustus, as stated by our author,
Aug. § 35. ambitus. A. and G. 220. ipse: i.e., Caesar.
1
So αὐτός in Greek designates always the chief personage, or the
one regarded by the writer or speaker as most important.
Used by a student of philosophy it means the head of the
school (αὐτὸς ἔφα said by the Pythagoreans); used by a
slave, it means his master. Cf. Plato, Protag. 314 D, ου
σχολὴ αὐτῷ, and in Lat. Juv. 5. 30; ipse capillato diffusum
consule potat. So, at the end of this chapter, ille and ipse are
contrasted. Tanusius Geminus. An annalist, whose books
are described by Seneca as ' ponderosi,' and possibly identical
with those mocked at by Catullus, 36. and elsewhere. Cf.
Plutarch, Caes. 22. - Marcus Bibulus in edictis. See § 20.
-significare: " to hint. "Axium : Q. Axius, whom Cicero
mentions in several letters. See ad Att. 3. 15; 4. 15; 5. 21;
12. I.-non obisse: 'diem obire' is an idiomatic phrase
to keep the day," i.e., to appear on the day. Obire diem
suum
mori.
Idem Curio sed et M. Actorius. 'Sed et'
"and in fact." In this sense sed is regularly accompanied by
etiam, as here. Cf. Calig. § 16, ex testamento Tiberi sed et
Iuliae Augustae: Cic. ad Fam. 13. 64. 2, si eum adiuveris apud
ipsum praeclarissime posueris sed mihi etiam gratissimum feceris: id. ad Att. 5. 21. 6, Volusium certum hominem sed mirifice
etiam abstinentem. So, without the addition of the etiam in id.
de Offic. 1. 10. 33, nimis callida sed malitiosa iuris interpretatione
where sed et quidem. destitutum: "abandoned."-morte
Pisonis: who died on his way to Spain. Sallust, Cat. 19. Piso
ab equitibus Hispanis quos sine exercitu ductabat, iter faciens occisus est.
=
=
...
“
10. basilicas: the basilica (βασιλικὴ στοά) was a large
roofed hall with double rows of pillars on each side forming
aisles (porticus), and as a rule not walled in. The pure Latin
name is regia, for which see Aug. § 31, fin. contra theatri eius regiam. ad tempus :
temporarily." So in tempus, for which
cf. Tac. Annal. 14. 20: scaena in tempus structa., pars apparatus: sc. ludorum, as in Cic. de Offic. 2. 16. 55: ludorum venationumque apparatu. venationes: technically used of the
combats with wild beasts, as in the passage from Cicero just
quoted, in Calig. §§ 18., 27, and often. edidit: the technical
word. So editor of the exhibitor, and in Suetonius also, munerarius (Domit. § 10). Florus employs munerator (3. 20. 9.)
...
-gladiatorium munus. See Introd. II, a. aliquanto paucioribus paribus: "with somewhat fewer pairs." Plutarch
gives the number of pairs of gladiators on this occasion as three
hundred and twenty. Caes.
I
11. Aegyptus provincia: Hase remarks on this that the word
provincia can only be understood here in the general sense of
locus, regio, since in § 35 we are told that he gave the kingdom of
Egypt to Cleopatra and her younger brother, veritus provinciam
facere ne quandoque violentiorem praesidem nacta, novarum rerum materia esset. See also Hirt. Bell. Alexand. §§ 31 and 33;
and Dio. Cass. 42. 44. Augustus reduced it to the form of a
province. See Aug. § 18, Aegyptum in provinciae formam redactam; and Tac. Annal. 2. 59, id. Hist. 1. 11, Strabo, 17. 1. 12.
For the use of provincia in this general sense Hase cites Livy, 2,.
54; 40.35, and Nepos, Alcibiad. 4. - Nec obtinuit etc. A
loosely constructed sentence, brevity being attained at the expense of exactness. Nec = nec tamen, and the clause quorum
auctoritatem ut gives us an anastrophe of the conjunction and the
use of the relative, for the demonstrative introduced by a copulative. quibus = quibuscunque. tropaea Gai Mari. See the account in Plutarch, Caes. 6. Vell. 2. 43, says briefly: et restituta in
aedilitate, adversante quidem nobilitate, monumenta C. Mari. The
name tropaea among the Romans seems to have been used as an
equivalent of spolia, referring to suits of armor, shields, and weapons, or after naval warfare was introduced, beaks of ships, as
in the domus rostrata of Pompey, for which see Cic. Philipp. 2.
28. Later, the practice of erecting formal trophies on the field
of battle was borrowed from the Greeks (Florus, 3. 2), and Caesar himself, as we are told by Dio Cass. (42. 48), followed the
example of Fabius Maximus and Pompey and set up a trophy
after defeating Pharnaces. More commonly, however, the memorial was raised at Rome itself. Plutarch describes these
trophies" of Marius restored by Caesar as " images of Marius
and figures of Victory, with trophies in their hands glittering
with gold and exquisitely made, with inscriptions on them referring to Marius's exploits." in exercenda de sicaris quaestione :
by what is fully known as the Lex Cornelia de Sicariis et Veneficis,
and passed during the dictatorship of Sulla, B.C. 82. It was directed against all cases of manslaughter or arson, against all persons who went about with weapons for any illegal purpose, or who
made, bought, sold, or possessed poison, or who in any office
conspired to obtain a judgment against a citizen. As subsequently amended, it also punished impia sacrificia. Under the
republic the penalty prescribed by the law was interdictio aquae
et ignis; under the emperors, deportatio in insulam and the confiscation of property. Cf. the punishment for parricide in Aug.
§ 33.
12. qui perduellionis diem diceret. Perduellio or the crimen
laesae maiestatis was a name applied to any act committed
against the Roman people or against its safety, including any act
or attempt against the person of a magistrate who held the imperium or potestas. Under Tiberius the law of maiestas was
made to include the most trifling acts construed as impairing or
neglecting the respect due to the dignity of the emperor. Thus,
a person who undressed near the statue of Augustus, or who
carried a coin bearing the emperor's effigy into a brothel, or
entered a latrina while wearing the image of the emperor
upon his ring, was adjudged guilty of treason. See Tib. § 58
and the full note on dominus, Aug. § 53. condemnavit:
prosecuted." In this sense rare, but Ciceronian. Cf. Cic in
Verr. 2. 5. 69. - ad populum provocanti. See Livy, 1. 26.
Ita de provocatione certatum ad populum est.
"
13. Deposita provinciae spe, i.e., of Egypt.aeris alieni:
so pecuniae mutuae, argentum mutuum, and absolutely, mutuum.in eorum tribubus. The whole number of Roman
tribes was thirty-five, of which thirty-one were tribus rušticce
(Aemilia, Aniensis, Arniensis, Claudia, Cornelia, Crustumina, Fabia, Falerina, Galesia, Horatia, Lemonia, Maecia,
Menenia, Oufentina, Papiria, Pollia, Pomptina, Popilia, Pupinia, Quirina, Romilia, Sabatina, Scaptia, Sergia, Stellatina, Terentina, Tromentina, Veientina, Velina, Veturia, Voltinia), and
the remaining four, tribus urbanae (Collina, Esquilina, Palatina,
Suburana). The election (captio) of the pontifex maximus, as
seen by this passage, was a function of the comitia tributa, and
so Livy, 25. 5; though we also read of the pontifical college exercising the right of co-optation. Probably the college pro forma confirmed the selection of a candidate made by the comitia.,
-A great deal of unnecessary speculation has been wasted on
the etymology of the word pontifex. The ancients were divided
in opinion on the subject, some assigning it to posse. Göttling (Geschichte d. Röm. Staatsver., p. 173) would make the
word to have been originally pompifex (pompa), the “master of
ceremonies." But Varro's explanation (De Ling. Lat. 5. 83,
Müll.) is good so far as it derives it from pons, though the reason which he alleges is insufficient. The Greek writers translate
the word pontifices by γεφυροποιοί, on which see Dionys. I.
38. The election of Caesar as pontifex maximus took place in
the year 63 B.c., in the consulship of Cicero and C. Antonius.
14. detecta coniuratione Catilinae. B. C. 63. — municipatim:
see Cicero's comment on this proposition in his fourth Catilinarian oration, 4. 7, and 5. 9, and 10: municipiis dispertiri iubet.
See also Caesar, as quoted by Sallust, Cat. 51. ita censeo: publicandas eorum pecunias, ipsos in vinculis habendos per municipia
quae maxime opibus valent. After Caesar had spoken, his pregnant oratory and above all his strong appeal against any departure from the ordinary course of law, produced so powerful an
effect upon the Senate that for the moment it seemed as though
his plan would be adopted. Silanus, who had proposed the
death penalty under the plea that the conspirators had by their
treason to the State, voluntarily divested themselves of citizenship and the protection of the Sempronian law, withdrew
his motion. Quintus Cicero, the brother of the orator, followed
in the same line, and it was only when Cato sprang up and
poured forth a passionate harangue, appealing alike to the fears
and the prejudices of his hearers, that the Senators were induced
to reject the counsel of Caesar. Cato's most effective thrust
was that in which he implied that Caesar himself was the accomplice of Catiline. The story is told by Plutarch, that while
Caesar was delivering his argument an attendant handed him a
note. Cato, suspicious, and filled with the belief that the note
was from one of the conspirators, rose and demanded that it be
opened and publicly read. Thereupon Caesar handed it to
Cato, who opened it to find that it was a compromising loveletter from his own sister Servilia, the mother of Brutus. Upon
which tradition Mr. Froude remarks: "It is enough to say that
there is no contemporary evidence for the story at all. . . Ladies do not send in compromising letters to their lovers when
they are on their feet in Parliament; nor, if such an accident
should happen, do the lovers pass them over to be read by the
ladies' brothers." On municipatim see Introd. 4.-interpretatione lenire. He had advocated ' ultimum supplicium'; he
now pretended that he had meant perpetual imprisonment as
being the 'ultimum supplicium' for a Roman citizen. manus
equitum Romanorum. See Sallust, Cat. 49, and Plutarch, Caes.
8.
15. de refectione Capitoli. The temple of Jupiter Capitolinus was burnt during the civil wars (B.C. 83).
Sulla restored it in
part, but died before the work was completed. Cf. Gell. 2. 10.
2. Q. Catulus curator restituendi Capitolii. ad disquisitionem populi. Tac. Hist. 3. 72.--in alium transferebat : "he
attempted to transfer to another." The conative use of the imperfect, for which see Roby, 1470; A. and G. 277. c. Alium refers
to Pompey, but the transfer was not made. verum impar optimatium conspirationi: "but he was no match for the allied nobles." Optimatium conspirationi by metonymy for optimatibus
inter se consentientibus. The use of conspiratio in this passage
may be illustrated by Cic. in Cat. 4. 10. 22, Tantam conspirationem bonorum omnium. In fact, the word is quite as often
used in bonam partem as otherwise. Novorum consulum officio: the new consuls were D. Junius Silanus and L. Licinius
Murena. The word officium refers to the custom of the salutatio, of which Pliny, Epist. 9. 37, says, writing to Paulinus:
Vides quam non delicata me causa obire primum consulatus tui
diem non sinat, quem tamen hic quoque ut praesens votis gaudio
gratulatione celebrabo. actionem deposuit: "he abandoned
the measure."
16. Caecilio Metello. He demanded that Pompey be recalled
to Italy, in this opposing chiefly the younger Cato. Plutarch
(Cato Min.) gives the account in full of the struggle between the
two. sponte et ultro. 'Sponte' means without help or compulsion; 'ultro' without suggestion. festinato: Post Aug.
for festinanter, for which festinatim is the ante-classical word.
On the occurrence, see Froude, Caesar, pp. 149-50.-inducto
priore decreto: inducere is the regular expression for obliterating
a bit of writing by drawing the broad end of the stilus over the
wax of the tablet. Hence the famous Horatian maxim: saepe
stilum vertas iterum quae digna legi sint Scripturus (Sat. 1. 10.
73) and inducendi senatus consulti in Cic. ad Att. 1. 20. 4.
“
1
17. Recidit rursus. Pleonasm like rursus repetita, § 2. See
Introd. 9.- Novium Nigrum quaestorem. Not one of the
regular quaestors, but, as Hase clearly shows, a quaesitor especially put in charge of the quaestio concerning the affair of
Catiline. So Cicero (Cat. 4. 5. 10) speaks of himself as a quaesitor. See Tib. § 33.- Q. Curio. On the share of Curius himself in the conspiracy and of his betrayal of the plot, cf. Sallust.
Cat. 17., 23., and 26.pignoribus captis. So Livy, 3. 38, 12.
cited by Hase: apparitores ... ad pignora capienda. —male mulcatum: roughly handled." Mulco is qs. molico from molo with
an iterative signification. Cf. fodico, vellico, etc. -maiorem
potestatem: "because he had permitted a magistrate of higher
power to be brought before him by force."
ite word of Sueton., usually followed by the
Aug. §§ 14., 66; Tib. § 56., 62; Calig. § 23;
Nero, § 35. potestas: abstract for concrete.
ymy is to be observed in Claud. § 23, with which we may compare the line of Juvenal, 10. 100: Fidenarum Gabiorumque esse
potestas. The Italians to-day use the word podestà of the chief
officer of the petty towns, and so potestad in Spanish and podestat in Portuguese. A like metonymy is seen in magistratus, and
in the Gk. ἀρχή, used in the plural of officials. See Mayor ad
Juv. 1. c., and cf. Introd. 7. b.
Compello is a favoraccus. with ad. Cf.
Claud. §§ 15., 21;
The same meton-
18. E praetura: "after his praetorship." So ex consulatu
in § 19, and so ἐκ in Greek: ἐκτούτου. - ante quam provinciae ornarentur. A regular phrase used of supplying the newly
chosen magistrate with money, arms, apparitores, etc. Cf. Cic.
ad Att 4. 17. 2, and Livy, 40. 36. 5. In Cic. De Lege Agrar.
2. 13. 32, the word is used of the decemvirs: apparitoribus,
scribis, librariis, praeconibus, architectis, praeterea mulis, tabernaculis, centuriis, supellectili, which passage sufficiently defines
the preparation considered necessary for a magistrate.-metune iudicii. The creditors are said by Plutarch to have been
satisfied by Crassus, then the richest man in Rome, who made
himself responsible for 830 talents. privato: no longer praetor, and not yet formally installed in his province, and hence liable to be sued. - profectus est. "In his journey, as he was
crossing the Alps, and passing by a small village of the barba
rians with but few inhabitants, and those dreadfully poor, his
companions asked themselves in mockery whether there could
be any canvassing for offices there, or any contention as to
which should be superior, or any feuds of the chief men with
each other. To which Caesar answered seriously: 'As for me,
I had rather be the first man among these fellows, than the second man in Rome.'
Plutarch. pacataque provincia: by
conquering the Calaici and Lusitani, for which he was saluted by
his soldiers as Imperator. Sed cum etc. "But since, after
the election had been ordered, his candidacy could not be considered unless he entered the city as a civilian, and since many
opposed his petition to be exempted from the operation of the
laws, etc." See Plutarch, Pomp. 44; Dio Cass. 37. 54.
19. pecuniaque polleret: "but was powerful through his
wealth." The adversative use of que is common after negative
expressions. pronuntiaret = promitteret as in § 26; Nero,
§ 24; Galba, § 16. e re publica. Not "from the public treasury," but "for the public advantage." Baumgarten-Crusius
compares the expression of Cicero, si arbitrare utile eque re publica esse, ad Brut. 1. 5. 1, and exque re publica fecisse et facere;
Philip. 3. 15. In these passages e re publica = rei publicae
causa.silva callesque : i.e., in which no military reputation
could be gained. societatem. The famous first triumvirate,
B.C. 60. ulli e tribus. Cf. Introd. 17.
20. honore: regularly of civic office as contrasted with military command for which the word is imperium. So Juvenal, 1.
117, by a metonomy uses summus honor for consul.diurna
acta. Besides the Acta Populi there were (a) Acta Forensia,
kept in the archives of the temple of Saturn and in other temples, containing the leges, plebiscita, notes of the elections of
aediles, tribunes, and other officers, and resembling the δημόσια γράμματα of the Athenians; (6) Acta Iudiciaria, legal reports; (c) Acta Militaria, containing the statistics of the soldiers,
and kept by the librarius legionis (Veget. 2. 19); (d) Acta Civilia, called by Polybius ἀπογραφαί, and constituting a register
of births, deaths, marriages, and divorces. Of these the censor
originally had charge, but subsequently the praefectus aerarii.
Cf. Cic. ad Fam. 8. 7. The Acta Populi, also called Acta
Diurna, Urbana, or Publica, seem to have taken the place of
the modern newspaper, chronicling important events of the
day, giving summaries of political and legal orations, the deci
sions of the courts, news from the army, and the latest gossip of
the town. Cf. Dio Cass. 44. II, and 57. 21; Serv. ad Aen. 1.
373; Quint. 9. 3. 17; Leclerc, Sur les Journaux chez les Ro
mains; Cruttwell, Hist. of Rom. Lit., pp. 206-7; Teuffel, § 213.
2; E. Hübner in Fleckeisen's Jahrb. Suppl. III. pp. 564-594.
-accensus = apparitor. Officers assigned as attendants to
consuls, proconsuls, praetors, to serve summons and keep order.
As a military word it has two meanings; first, of the 'aids' of an
officer, and second, of a sort of reserved force which followed
the regular troops to take the places of those who fell in battle,
Cf. Cic. ad Q. Frat. I. 1. 4, and Livy, 45. 29. 2. Of the persor
in charge of a funeral, in Cic. de Leg. 2. 24.
obnuntiantem;
technical term used also of augurs and tribunes. The name
given to this interference is intercessio, which denotes the inter.
ference of any magistrate with the public acts of any other ma
gistrate of equal or inferior rank.referre aut censere : re.
ferre is to make a motion, i.e., referre ad senatum de aliqua re,
censere is to vote, i.e., sententiam dare. in levioribus turbis,
Cf. Ter. Andr. 2. 3. 6, tum illae turbae fient. nonnulli urba.
norum: urbanus here probably as in Plin. Epist. 4. 25, in the
sense of the Greek ἀστεῖος, for which cf. Plat. Rep. 452 D.,
opposed in meaning to rusticus = ἄγροικος. In Greek when it
is desired to convey the idea literally contained in ἀστεῖος, the
word ἀστικός is used, and so in Post Aug. Latin, urbicus, for
which see Aug. § 18. -praeponentes = ponentes. So deducere
= ducere, Aug. § 42.-hi versus: for other instances of popular wit cited by Suet. cf. §§ 49, 80; Aug. § 70; Tiber. § 59; Nero,
§§ 28, 39; Otho, § 3. So in France, as Hase remarks, the wits
of the day spoke of le consulat de Napoléon et de Bonaparte.—
Campum Stellatem: called so from the city Stella. The word
consecratus is not here used with any religious notion attached
to it, but simply in the sense of 'set apart,' i.e., for public purposes. On the Campus Stellatis see Cic. de Leg. Agr. 1. 7; 2.
29, and 2. 31: fundum pulcherrimum populi Romani caput vestrae pecuniae, pacis ornamentum, subsidium belli, fundamentum
vectigalium, horreum legionum, solatium annonae. Cf. also id.
"
ad Att. 2. 16, where he says: Just as I was about dropping
asleep, your letter on the subject of the Campanian land-division
was handed to me. Well, at first it startled me so as to put an end
to sleep, but more from thoughtfulness than from disquietude."
The agrarian law proposed by Caesar was rejected by the Senate,
but finally carried through on an appeal to the people. See
Mommsen, Bk. V. ch. 5. extra sortem: i.e., not by lot, but by a
committee of twenty. Velleius, 2. 45, says that Cicero refused
to serve as one of these vigintiviri. ad viginti milibus : in
such expressions, ad is merely adverbial = circiter, and so often
used by the historical writers. Cf. occisis ad hominum milibus
quattuor. Caes. B. G. 2. 33; Livy, 27. 12. 16. — publicanos :
men of the equestrian order who contracted for the collection
of the public taxes. Cf. Cic. ad Att. 2. 1. 8: "What could be
more outrageous than the publicans repudiating their contract?"
-licerentur: from liceor. --libuissent: the only instance
of libet in the plural. contradicente nullo. There seems
to be no classical authority for our familiar parliamentary
phrase nemine contradicente, though in other phrases Suet. employs nemine for nullo, contrary to Augustan usage. Cf. nemine excluso, Aug. § 45. M. Catonem interpellantem: i.e.,
delaying the business by parliamentary technicalities. Aulus
Gellius (4. 10. 8) gives a fuller account of this affair: "For the
sake of delaying the business [Cato] indulged in a long-winded
discourse, and kept using up the time in speaking. For a senator had the right, when called upon for his vote, to speak first on
any other matter he chose and as long as he chose. Caesar, as
consul, summoned an officer, and ordered Cato, since he would
not make an end of speaking, to be arrested as he spoke and
taken to prison. The Senate all rose together and escorted
Cato to the prison. Having caused this reproach, Caesar
checked himself and bade Cato be released." calumniarum:
By threatening him with an investigation of his acts while in
Asia. ad plebem transire: in order that he might be eligible
for the office of tribune. Cf Vell. 2. 45. induxit Vettium.
This is the emendation generally accepted for the MS. reading inductum... and inductum quendam, the latter undoubtedly a gloss,
and found in only one MS. That the person bribed to carry out
the plot was Vettius, is evident from Cic. ad Att. 2. 24, who
says: "It appears to me certain that Vettius, the man who
used to be my informer, has promised Caesar to contrive that
the younger Curio shall fall under suspicion of plotting." See
the whole passage.
21. Pompeium primum rogare sententiam coepit. The regular order of rogation, as we are informed by Aulus Gellius (4. 10,
and 14. 7) was (1) the princeps senatus; (2) the consuls elect;
(3) men of consular rank; (4) men of praetorian rank; (5) the
senatores pedarii, who wore the tunica laticlavia with broad
purple stripe, and received the name 'pedarii' because they could
only concur in the vote of others (pedibus ire). Thus it will be seen
that the princeps senatus was not the same as the presiding officer
(praeses). On the passage of our author, Gellius says: C. Caesar
in consulatu quem cum M. Bibulo gessit, quattuor solos extra ordinem rogasse sententiam dicitur. Ex his quattuor principem
rogabat M. Crassum ; sed, postquam filiam Cn. Pompeo desponderat, primum coeperat Pompeium rogare. See Aug. § 35, fin.
[At the end of § 22 the following words have been omitted
from the text: "ac negante quodam per contumeliam facile hoc
ulli feminae fore, responderet quasi alludens, 'in Syria quoque
regnasse Semiramin, magnamque Asiae partem Amazonas tenuisse quondam.'"]
“
23. Functus consulatu. Suet. several times uses fungor with
the accusative. For instances, see Introd. 13. irritas. in +
ratus.--abiit. Cf. Caes. B. G. 1. 7. Caesar cum id nuntiatum esset eos (Helvetios) per provinciam nostram iter facere
conari maturat ab urbe proficisci.eius in praeiudicium: as
an example of what was going to happen to himself," i.e., as a
precedent.reus: > accusator.in magno negotio habuit :
"he deemed it important." Cf. curae habuit, Aug. § 48.-
qui sibi recepissent propugnaturos : "who had promised him to
defend him in his absence." - absentiam = se absentem. See
Introd. 7 and 8. Recipere from the general sense of assuming
(ἐνδέχομαι) passes into the allied particular meaning of assuming an obligation, hence to promise (ἀναδέχομαι). -syngrapham:
“
an agreement in writing."
24. vocabulo quoque Gallico, Alauda enim appellabatur.
Alauda is the lark, an effigy of which the soldiers wore upon
their helmets. Cf. Cic. Philipp. 1. 8. 20; addo etiam iudices
manuplares ex legione Alaudarum; id. Philipp. 5. 5. 13, Alaudas iudices, Philipp. 13. 2. 3, and Plin. Η. Ν. 11. 37. 44. The
word alauda (Low Latin laudila, Ducange) has its representatives
in all the Romance languages, and is one of the few words that
can positively be assigned to a Keltic origin. Cf. the Sicilian
lodana, the O. Spanish aloeta, the Mod. Spanish alondra, the
Provençal alauza, the Italian allodola (lodola), the O. French
forms aloe, aloue, aloëte, and the Mod. French alouette. From
the O. French comes the O. Norse lõa, on which Diez cites
Grimm's Reineke Fuchs, p. 370. The following are the most
probable of the explanations that have been given of the word:
(a) alauda fr. the Breton alchoueder = alaw + adar, "bird of
melody" (Villemarqué). (b) alauda = the Welsh al, “ fine," and
awd, " song;" hence, "fine-singer." (c) alauda = 1/AL, "high"
and chwedl, "chant;" hence "soaring singer." (d) alauda =
VAL, "high," and awd, " song," giving the same meaning as
the preceding. Cf. Diefenbach in Zeitschriften für verg.
Sprachf. IV, p. 391, and Diez, Etymologisches Wörterbuch der
Romanischen Sprachen, s. v. allodola. The Latin form has
simply dropped the Keltic guttural. Diez notices that the names
of other birds of the same general class are also from the Keltic,
and cites as examples 'finch' (Ital. pincione, Span. pinzon, Fr.
pinçon, all cognate with the Welsh pinc), and the Port. catovia,
Sp. totovia, and Fr. cochevis, from the Breton kodioch. Cf.
Mahn, Etymol. Untersuch., p. 23. Other words in Latin to
which a Keltic origin is to be assigned are balteus, a belt; bardus (Cornish bardh, Bret. barz, and originally meaning a
speaker"); bascauda (Mart. 14. 99; Juv. 6. 46), a basket; caballus, a nag; cerevisia, beer; emarcus, a vine; gaesum, a javelin;
galba, a worm; langa, a lizard; mannus = caballus; petorritum,
a carriage; reda, id.; rufius, a lynx; sagum, a cloak; samolus,
brook-weed; soldurius, a vassal; taxea, lard; tufa, a crest (Eng.
top); urus, a wild ox; vargus, a stroller; vertagus, a greyhound;
and many others. decedentibus = cedentibus, as praeponentes
for ponentes in § 20. - plurium quam quisquam umquam dierum: note the order and the homoeoteleuton. See Introd. 10, c.
25. Omnem Galliam. Cf. Caes. B. G. 1. 1. Gebenna :
now Cevennes, quadringenties: sc. centena milia sestertiûm.
Cf. A. and G. 96 and 379. The word quadringenties is here
،،
supplied in the text, from Eutrop. 6. 14 (Dietsch): Gallia autem
tributi nomine annuum imperavit sestertium quadringenties.
Roth allows the lacuna to stand. ponte fabricato: Caes. B. G.
4. 17; Plutarch. Caes. 22; Dio Cass. 39. 48. - classe absumpta.
Caes. B. G. 5. 10. - legione fusa. id. ib. 7. 51. legatis caesis. id. ib. 5.24-37.
26. Publi Clodi caede. At the hands of Milo, B.C. 52. Cf.
Vell. 2. 47. nullum ... genus. Introd. 10, c. de manubiis: praeda is the booty; manubiae the money derived from the
sale of the booty. - domesticatim : ἅπαξ λεγόμενον. Introd. 4.
sicubi = si + quobi. So, sicunde. infestis spectatoribus.
Cf. Juvenal, 3. 36. — exercentibus.
Used absolutely for se exercentibus.
27. condicionem ei detulit: "offered to him as a match."
So, circumspectis condicionibus Tiberium privignum suum elegit,
Aug. § 63. congiario prosequebantur: prosequor is technically used (1) of acting as an escort, and (2) of any flattering
attention, as here and in Aug. § 49.
28. citra... auctoritatem : "without regard to the authority of the Senate and the people." This use of citra is postAug., and often found in Quintilian, who thus employs it more
than twenty times (L. and S.). In Suet. cf. citra commoda, Aug.
§ 24; and citra honorem, id. § 66.--superque : "and besides."
Cf. the phrase satis superque in Cic. de Amicit. 13. -ratio =
petitio.eo capite: "in that clause."-in aerarium: where
the laws after being cut upon tablets were preserved. Cf. Aug.
§ 94. The accusative with in is used regularly with condere,
because of the implied motion in the idea of placing. With colloco, statuo, etc., the ablative with in is the regular construction.
Cf. A. and G. 260, a. In Cic. Verr. 2. 4. 63, conditas in aerario
exhibits the same use of condere. —privilegium. A law relating to a single person.
29. insequenti anno. B.C. 49.- -fratri patrueli: a cousin
on the father's side of the family, opposed to consobrinus, a
cousin on the mother's side, for which frater matruelis is a late
Latin expression. Suet. (Calig. § 26, Claud. § 26) uses consobrinus of any relative = parens. - Curionem. Son of the Curio
mentioned in § 9. Cf. Vell. 2. 48: vir nobilis, eloquens, audax,
suae alienaeque et fortunae et pudicitiae prodigus, homo ingeniosissime nequam et facundus malo publico. See also Dio Cass.
40. 60. ingenti mercede: according to Val. Max. in the passage, 9. 1. 6. 60,000,000 sesterces. designatos etiam consule
C. Claudius Marcellus and L. Cornelius Lentulus. - deprecatus
est. Here de is intensive, and has the force of an adverb. The
adverb de, when used alone, occurs only in the expression susque
deque, on which see Gellius, 16. 9, and for which in classical
prose see Cic. ad Att. 14. 6 1.
In deprecor it often has the
true prepositional force, and hence deprecor often = depello. Cf.
κατά, which at times is an intensive, as in κατάγνυμι, ‘“ to
break to pieces," in Hom. Odyss. 9. 283, and again often in
its prepositional sense. Occasionally deprecor seems to blend
two notions (1) of begging off from reproach, and (2) of reviling
in turn, as in the poem of Catullus (Carm. 92.) cited by Gellius (7. 16. 2, Hertz) deprecor illam Assidue.
30. praetextum: a post-Aug. word for the Ciceronian species. So Aug. § 12. - opera. Cf. § 26. Milonis exemplo:
At the trial of Milo for the assassination of Clodius the court
was guarded by the soldiers of Pompey, to prevent the intimidation of the judges. Cf. Lucan, Phars. I. 323: Pompeiana
reum clauserunt signa Milonem. Pharsalica acie. A favorite
expression of Suet. Cf. una profligavit acie, § 35, and the
following: §§ 63, 75; Aug. § 12, and often.de Officiis tertio libro. The passage reads: ipse autem socer in ore semper
Graecos versus de Phoenissis habebat, quos dicam ut potero incondite fortasse sed tamen ut res possit intellegi (then follow the
lines given in the text). The quotation is from the Phoenissae,
524, being there put into the mouth of Eteocles. The lines are
also cited by Plutarch in his comparison of Nicias with Crassus.
-sic ipse convertit: sc. in Latinum. Cf. Cic. Tusc. Disp.
3. 14. 29: licet enim in Latinum illa convertere.
31. tribunorum: i.e., Antony and Q. Cassius. Cf. Caes. Bell.
Civil. 1. 5. Profugiunt statim ex urbe tribuni plebis seseque ad
Caesarem conferunt. Lucan Phars. 1. 266, has the following:
Expulit ancipiti discordes urbe tribunos
Victo iure minax iactatis curia Gracchis:
Hos iam nota ducis vicinaque signa petentes
Audax venali comitatur Curio lingua.
-intercessionem. Cic. (Philipp. 2. 21) calls it the "pestifera
intercessio" of Antony. ad lucem: "about daybreak.”—
Iacta alea est! Plutarch gives it in Greek as ἀνερρίφθω κύβos. Another reading in our text is esto.
33. equestres census. i.e., 400,000 sesterces. -ius anulorum = dignitas equestris. The gold ring was the badge of
equestrian rank, but was made less honorable as a distinction by
the frequent extension of the privilege to others. Thus under
Sulla, the actor Roscius received permission to wear the ring.
Tiberius tried to heighten the value of the badge by confining it
to those knights whose grandfathers as well as fathers had been
free-born men, but this restriction soon ceased to exist.
fama distulit: "rumor spread it abroad."
34. summa: "the substance." - sic se habent. So more
fully ita se res habet, Cic. Verr. 2. 2. 50; and more briefly sic
habet, Hor. Sat. 1. 9. 53, both answering to the Greek οὕτως
ἔχει. Cf. sic est, Ter. Adelph. 4. 5. 21, as in English; and non
est ita, Cic. de Off. 1. 44. — transfretaturi. Post-Aug. verb.
-urbe repetita. While there before, he forced open the
aerarium and helped himself to the public treasure, threatening
the tribune Metellus with death if he made any disturbance.
"Arms and laws have each their own time," he is reported to
have said on this occasion.
37. quinquies. Numeral adverbs if formed from cardinals
are properly written with the termination -ies; otherwise they
end in -iens as totiens, quotiens, etc. This rule, however, is not
always strictly observed. Cf. Neue, Lat. Formenlehre, II. 171-
5.Velabrum: a street on the Aventine named from the
booths with awnings (velabra) that lined it. Plautus (Capt.
3. 1. 29) makes Ergasilus speak of in Velabro olearii, and the
street seems to have been given up to dealers in oil, butter, and
cheese. The ancients, however, refer the name Velabrum to velum, a sail, and explain it by the alleged fact that the place
was once a navigable lake. Cf. Tibullus, 2. 5. 33: At qua Velabri regio patet, ire solebat Exiguus pulsa per vada linter aqua.
See also Propert. 5. 9. 5. (Müll.): Qua Velabra suo stagnabant
flumine quaque Nauta per urbanas velificabat aquas. Other
streets at Rome were likewise devoted to particular trades.
Thus the Argiletum was the home of the book-trade, and the Vicus
Sandaliarius of the shoe-trade, though later also of the booktrade.ascenditque Capitolium. The regular order of procedure in a triumphus iustus was as follows: (1) the opening of all
the temples, and their decoration with garlands, etc.; (2) the address of the imperator to his assembled troops, concluding with a
distribution of money to each man; (3) the meeting with the
Senate and magistrates at the Porta Triumphalis; (4) the triumphal procession along the Via Sacra in the following order,-
the Senate and magistrates, trumpeters, the spoils and fercula,
flute-players, the bulls or cattle for sacrifice together with the
priests and their attendants, the arms and standards of the conquered generals, these generals and their kinsmen, the whole
body of prisoners in chains, the crowns bestowed upon the imperator by foreign princes, the lictors of the imperator with their
fasces, the imperator himself in the triumphal chariot drawn by
four horses and attended by the servus publicus holding over his
head a golden crown, the sons of the imperator (who sometimes,
however, rode upon the horses of their father's chariot, for
which see Tib. § 6), and finally the whole body of the troops in
heavy marching order, decorated with laurel and shouting and
singing; (5) the murder of several of the captive generals in the
prison near the Capitol; (6) religious offerings and sacrifices;
(7) a public feast to which the consuls were invited, though they
followed the old precedent of staying away in order that the
imperator might be the greatest and most distinguished person
present. trium verborum. Florus (4. 2. 63) says: Nec vana
de se praedicatio est Caesaris ante victum hostem esse quam visum.
Plutarch (Caes. 50) says : πρός τινα τῶν φίλων ᾿Αμάντιον
ἔγραψε τρεῖς λέξεις. ᾿Ἦλθον, εἶδον, ἐνίκησα.
38. totidem olei libras: this is probably the only passage
where libra is used of liquid measure. viscerationem: “a
public distribution of meat." - prandia: used of public meals
of bread, cold meat, and fish, at which no wine was served.
39. per omnium linguarum histriones. So Aug. § 43.-
naumachiam. Further on he uses the pure Latin term navale
proelium. See Introd. 2. depugnavit = pugnavit. See Introd. 13, c. Pyrricham. The Pyrrhic dance (saltatio) seems
to have been first introduced among the public games at Rome
on this occasion. It is afterward mentioned as having been exhibited by Nero (Nero § 12), by Caligula (Dio Cass. 60. 7), and
by Hadrian (Spart. Hadr. 19). It seems to have originated in a
sort of military drill, its movements being those of attack and
defence, and was danced to the flute played in quick time.
From its rapid movement comes the name of the metrical foot,
the Pyrrhic (((), and the double Pyrrhic or proceleusmatic
(((((). See Dict. of Antiq. s. v. saltatio.ludis : sc. scenicis. Decimus Laberius eques. Macrobius (Sat. 2. 7. 2)
says: Laberium asperae libertatis equitem Romanum Caesar quingentis milibus invitavit ut prodiret in scaenam et ipse ageret
mimos quos scriptitabat. Sed potestas non solum si invitet sed
etiam si supplicet cogit, unde se et Laberius a Caesare coactum in
prologo testatur. Macrobius preserves the part of the prologue
in which Laberius complains of the indignity put upon him:
Ego bis tricenis annis actis sine nota
Eques Romanus [e] Lare egressus meo
Domum revertar mimus.
In the course of the play, personating a lashed slave, Laberius
uttered the signi ionis ant line:
Por, Quirites, libertatem perdimus!
and again the famous verse:
Necesse est multos timeat quem multi timent;
upon which, says Macrobius: universitas populi ad solum Caesarem oculos et ora convertit, notantes impotentiam eius hac dicacitate lapidatam. Of the mimes that Laberius wrote, we have
the titles of forty-four. See Macrob. 2. 6. 6 sq.; Seneca, in
Controv. 7. p. 207 and 414 (Bu.); Gell. 8. 15. (lemm.); 16. 7.; Grysar, De Mimo Romanorum, and Teuffel, & 179. 4. in quattuordecim: sc. ordinibus. The first fourteen rows
seats back of
the orchestra, reserved by the law of L. Roscius Otho (в.с.
67) to members of the equestrian order, a law so unpopular
at the time of its enactment that its author was hissed on his
next appearance at the theatre. Cf. Juvenal, 3. 153-159, and
Prof. Mayor's note on the passage. See also Aug. § 14 and
§ 40, and Appian, 5. 15. In the former place we have the
full expression in quattuordecim ordinibus. —equos desultorios:
"horses ridden bareback." The name desultor was given to the
acrobat who leaped from horse to horse while riding at full
1
speed. Cf. Livy. 44. 9: semel quadrigis, semel desultore
misso vix unius horae tempus utrumque curriculum complebat.
For desultorius = desultor cf. Cic. pro Muren. 27.57.-
Troiam. So Aug. § 43: Troiae lusum edidit frequentissime
maiorum minorumque puerorum prisci decorique moris exis
timans. Cf. Verg. Aen. 5. 545 sq. With maiorum minorumque sc. natu.commissis: "matched." - in Minore Codeta :
a field across the Tiber, so called from a kind of plant that grew
there, codeta, fr. cauda.tantum hominum. With this cf.
tantum hostium intra muros est, Livy, 3. 17. 4., sed quid hie
tantum hominum incedunt? Plaut. Poen. 3. 3. 5. prae
turba. In strictly classical Latin prae in this sense is only used
with an expressed or implied negative. Cf. Roby, 2056.
40. fastos correxit. The oldest Roman year is said to have
consisted of to months, beginning with March, of which 4 had
31 days (pleni menses), and the rest 30 days each (cavi menses).
The pleni menses were March, May, July, and October.
Hence this so-called Year of Romulus had 304 days. Macrobius (1. 12. 39) says that to this year the days necessary to
complete a solar year were added as a supplementary month
which received no definite name until later. Numa's Year
was one of 12 months, counting in all 355 days, i.e., a lunar
year and one day more. As this was about II days short of the
true year an intercalary month was inserted after February every
two years, containing 22 or 23 days. The Year of the Decemviri
contained 12 months, of which March, May, July, and October
had 31 days each, February 28 days, and the remaining 7 months
29 days each, in all 355 days. This was corrected by an intercalary month called Mercedonius (Μερκηδόνιος). Caesar, assisted by Sosigenes, a Peripatetic philosopher of Alexandria, and
Flavius, a Roman scholar, introduced (B.C. 45) the modifications
that converted the year into that which is now, with or without
the Gregorian modifications, used by all civilized nations, and
which from its author received the name of the Julian Year.
See Aug. § 31; Macrob. S. 1. 12-14; Plutarch, Caes. 59; Dio
Cass. 43. 26; Ovid, Fast. 3. 155 sq.; Pliny, H. N. 18. 25.; id. 18.57.
The regulation of the year by Caesar was made the subject of
complaint by his enemies, who were continually on the watch for
something that could be used against him with the people.
Cicero made one of his jokes upon the subject. When some
one happened to remark that the constellation Lyra would rise
upon a certain day, the orator replied, “Undoubtedly; there is
an edict to that effect;" as though Caesar's rule had been extended even to the heavenly bodies. Changes in the calendar
have always caused popular discontent. In England, when the
Gregorian changes were made, on the adoption of the New Style,
in 1752, the date being set on eleven days, mobs paraded the
streets bearing placards inscribed, "Give us back our eleven
days!" for in the opinion of the rabble, each man's life had been
lessened to just that extent by Act of Parliament!
41. Senatum supplevit. For the character of some of his
new senators see § 80, and Aug. § 35.- magistratuum numerum ampliavit. As did also Augustus, who nova officia excogitavit, Aug. § 37. - nudatos opere, etc. Observe the chiastic order.
pronuntiarentur: "should be appointed." So
Livy, 24. 27.
illum et illum: "so-and-so." Cf. ille aut ille
in Cic. Sex. Rosc. Amerin. 21. 59. - proscriptorum liberos:
contrary to the law of Sulla, enacted B.C. 80. Cf. Velleius, 2. 43.
Recensum populi : i.e., with reference to the distribution of corn,
as appears from what follows. Cf. Appian. Bell. Civ. 2. 120.;
Plutarch, Pomp. 50.- nec more nec loco solito: that is, not
by the customary officers (the censors, and the public scribes appointed by the Senate), nor in the Campus Martius. vicatim
per dominos insularum: "ward by ward, by the aid of the owners
of tenements." An insula comprised originally a single lodging-house, of considerable height and of rather flimsy construction. Later, and in the passage before us, it seems to mean a
"block" of houses built together around a common court. In
Rome, according to Preller, there were some 1780 private houses
and 44,000 insulae. Suet. Ner. § 38, speaks of immensum numerum insularum. The person in charge was known as insularius
(Dig. 7. 8. 16), and must be distinguished from dominus insulae,
the owner. Cf. Vitruv. 2. 8; Cic. pro Cael. 7, and Becker's Gallus, Excursus I. qui recensi non essent: i.e., who had not been
enrolled among those entitled to receive corn at the public expense. The subsortitio was the choice of substitutes by lot.
42. colonias: especially Corinth and Carthage, as appears
from Plutarch, Caes. 57. "To please his army he sent out col-
...
onies to a number of places, of which Carthage and Corinth
were the most noted; which as before they had been laid in
ruins at the same time, so now they were restored and repopulated together." - qui pecuariam facerent: "who were engaged
in cattle-breeding." - medicinam professos. Suet. uses the
noun professores in Tiber. § II, circa scholas et auditoria professorum; and in Rhet. § 5, Sextus Clodius . eloquentiae professor.per aestimationem possessionum quanti, etc. According
to the assessed value of their property, rated according to what
they had acquired before the civil war. cuncta collegia.
"All the clubs," i.e., guilds and semi-secret associations of artisans and work-people, organizations that could readily be converted into political engines, and hence viewed with distrust by
Caesar and his successors (cf. Aug. § 32), as has also been the
case in modern times in despotic countries. The chief objection
to the Christians on the part of the Roman emperors seems to
have arisen from a suspicion that their frequent meetings had a
mysterious and semi-political color. On the guilds at Rome cf.
Plutarch, Numa 17, and Josephus, Antiq. 14. 10, 8. ut Cicero
scribit. Burmann ingeniously suggests that these words are
more properly to be inserted in the text after exsulabant, and
will then refer to the passage pro Caecina, 34., exsilium non
supplicium est, etc. More probably, however, the passage in
Cic. referred to by Suet. has not come down to us.
43. Legem praecipue sumptuarium exercuit: "enforced."
Sumptuary laws were at a very early period known to the
Romans, and continued to remain one of the many proofs of
the paternalism so characteristic of all the governments established by the Latin races. The censors in general exercised the
restrictive power afterwards embodied in specific laws; and set
the nota censoria upon many whose luxury of living seemed inconsistent with the traditions of the Republic. Thus Cornelius
Rufinus, though he had been twice consul, besides holding the
dictatorship and securing the honor of a triumph, was expelled
from the Senate for having ten pounds of silver plate when the
law allowed only eight ounces (Gell. 4. 8. 7). The Lex Oppia,
enacted during the second Punic War, regulated the extravagance of women, forbidding any woman to own more than half
an ounce of gold, or wear a particolored dress, or ride in a
1
carriage in the vicinity of any city or town (Valer. Max. 9. 1. 3).
The Lex Orchia (B.C. 181) checked extravagance in feasting (Macrob. 3. 17), as did also the Lex Fannia (B.C. 161), which forbade
more than one fowl to be served up at a single dinner (Gell. 2.
24, where a list of other sumptuary laws is given). The Lex
Licinia regulated, among other things, expenditure at marriage
entertainments. The Lex Cornelia (B.C. 81) reiterated the provisions of the preceding (Gell. 1. c.). The Twelve Tables
checked extravagance at funerals (Cic. de Leg. 2. 23-25). Livy,
(10. 13) speaking of the Licinian Law, says: eo anno plerisque
dies dicta ab aedilibus quia plus quam quod lege finitum erat agri
possiderent. The sumptuary regulations enforced by Caesar
seem to be alluded to by Cic. ad Fam. 7. 26, and id. ib. 9. 15.
Many other sumptuary regulations made on special occasions
are also recorded. Caesar used the power of sumptuary restriction to augment the population, granting to mothers of three
children the right of riding in a litter, of wearing purple, and of
adorning themselves with pearls. Augustus enacted a sumptuary law (Aug. § 34); Tiberius curtailed the salaries of actors,
and recommended a number of sumptuary measures-the regulation of the price of Corinthian brass, the lessening of the prices
charged by butchers, and expressed much indignation because
three mullets had been sold for 30,000 sesterces. He wished
also to prohibit the sale of pastry in eating-houses (Tib. § 34).
Domitian regulated the price of slaves (Domit. § 7), as afterward
did Justinian.
44. de tuendo ampliandoque imperio. Plutarch mentions
among the designs that Caesar had formed, the following: a war
against the Parthians; the complete subjugation of Germany; a
canal across the isthmus of Corinth; the diversion of the Tiber
from its course by a deep channel direct from Rome to Circeii
and thence to Tarracina and the sea; the redemption of a vast
tract of land by draining the Pomptine Marshes; the removal of
hidden rocks and the deepening of the water at Ostia; and the
creation of new ports with moles, docks, and commodious harbors.complanato lacu. So complanata fossuris montium
iuga, Calig. § 37, and supra, § 39. -ius civile ad certum modum
redigere: which Cicero had already attempted to do. Cf. Gell.
1. 22. 7. M. autem Cicero in libro qui inscriptus est De Iure
..publicare: "to
Civili in Artem Redigendo.bibliothecas
open libraries to the public." In this sense, publicare is Post
Aug. Cf. libellos vetuit Augustus publicare, in § 56; and extra
ordinem publicare, Aug. § 43. The first library opened to the
public at Rome was that built by Asinius Pollio ten years after
Caesar's death, and mentioned in Aug. § 29. Four years later
(B.C. 30), Augustus decided to carry out the plan which the text
before us attributes to Julius, and to found a great library under
the control of the State. Five imperial libraries finally arose:
(1) the Bibliotheca Octaviae, (2) the Bibliotheca Palatina Apollinis, of which C. Julius Hyginus was the librarian; (3) the
Bibliotheca Tiberiana, founded by Tiberius and famous as a
reference library for state papers and public documents; (4)
Bibliotheca Vespasiana in the Forum Pacis; (5) Bibliotheca
Traiana, the most magnificent of all, and renowned for its
collection of books written upon leaves of ivory. Books could
be borrowed by private individuals, as the passage in Gellius
(19. 5. 4.) seems to prove. The number of books in a public
library seems to have ranged from 100,000 to 700,000, which
latter number is given by Gellius as that of the volumes in the
two Alexandrian libraries of the Bruchion and the Serapeion,
See the very interesting chapter on Roman Libraries in Prof.
Lanciani's Ancient Rome in the Light of Recent Discoveries.
45. animo linqui : "subject to fainting-fits."-comitiali
quoque morbo. Epilepsy gets the name here applied to it
because an attack of the disease was considered ill-omened,
and hence led to the adjournment of the comitia. From the
suddenness of the attacks and the horrible appearance of the sufferer it seems to have been regarded as a special visitation of
divine displeasure, and hence Celsus styles it morbus maior and
morbus sacer. As such, it was customary for those present at
the time of the attack to spit upon the patient, and hence Plautus
calls it morbus qui sputatur (Capt. 3. 4. 18), and speaks of epileptics as those quibus insputari saluti fuit (id. 3. 4. 23). Cf.
Pliny, H. N. 10. 23. 33, and 28. 4. 7. Spitting seems to have
been regarded as having some specific virtue in cases of disease.
Varro (R. R. 1. 2. 27) gives a charm to be used against foot-ache,
with the direction that the sufferer shall sing it thrice nine times,
touch the ground, and spit, Cf, also St. John, 9. 6, - bis. At
"
Corduba in Spain, and once in Africa,
morosior : “ very fastidious." On morosus cf. Gell. 4. 9. 12. sed velleretur
etiam: " but even had his hair plucked out by the roots." Cf.
Gell. 6. 12. 4, and see Aug. § 79. A very rare use of vello, except in the perfect participle, which often has the meaning
'shorn," "smooth." Cf. vulsi levatique, Quint. Inst. 2. 5. 12.
-a vertice: "it had been his custom to comb his scanty hair
back upon the crown of his head." For a vertice, in this sense,
cf. such phrases as a tergo, a latere, ab ea parte, etc., used of
place where. E.g., a Tiberi, on Tiber's side, Livy, 40. 51.
For one of the obtrectatorum joci, see the verse sung by his soldiers and cited in § 51.lato clavo ad manus fimbriato. A
tunic with fringed sleeves extending to the wrist. The Latin
language, like the Greek, tolerates great inexactness in the use
of names of the parts of the body. Here manus means the
"
wrists," for which there is no word in classical Latin. So pes
is used of the leg in Aug. de Civ. Dei, 22. 22; crus of the
foot in Ovid, Met., 11. 74; talus (properly the ankle) of the heel
in Cic. pro Cluent. 40, 111; and so bracchium, often used loosely
of the whole arm. So too, in Greek, πούς of both foot and leg,
Hom. Od. 4. 149; χείρ of the arms, Iliad, 6. 81; and ὦμος of
the arms, Hdt. 2. 106. — Sullae dictum. Cf. note on § 1.
46. in Subura: a somewhat disreputable quarter of the city,
with a dense population, and noisy. Martial (12. 18. 2) calls it
clamosa Subura, and in 7. 31. 11 speaks of its many shops; Juvenal (11.51), fervens Subura; and both Persius (5.32) and
Martial (11. 78. 11) mention it as the resort of prostitutes. It
lay between the Esquiline and Viminal hills. domo publica :
" in an official residence." in Nemorensi, sc. agro. Near Aricium. The place gets its name from the grove of the temple of
Diana near by. Cf. Cic. ad Attic. 6. 1. 25. Caesarem in Nemore
aedificando diligentiorem fore. quia non tota, etc., "because
it did not altogether suit his taste." -sectilia pavimenta =
λιθόστρωτα. See Becker's Gallus, Excursus I. scene 2.
47. spe margaritarum. Tacit. (Agric. 12) speaks of the
pearls of Britain as off-color. Plutarch (Caes. 23) says: "His
expedition into Britain was the most famous proof of his courage; for he was the first who brought a navy into the Western
Ocean, or who sailed into the Atlantic with an army for the purpose of making war." --toreumata : "embossed work." Cf.
Sallust. Cat. 22, tabulas, signa, toreumata emunt.servitia
rectiora, etc. Abstract for the concrete servos rectiores politioresque. For rectus in this sense cf. Catull. 10. 20: Non possem
octo homines parare rectos; and see infra, § 56, recti et venusti.
For the metonymy consult Introd. 7, b.
48. convivatum, sc. est. Impersonal use. sagati palliative: the sagati were his own officers wearing the sagum or military cloak; the palliati, the Greeks of distinction in his retinue;
the togati, Romans who chanced to be in the province. Sagatus
is sometimes used of a soldier as opposed to a civilian for the
more usual armatus or caligatus.
[Section 49, omitted in the text, reads as follows: Pudicitiae
eius famam nihil quidem praeter Nicomedis contubernium laesit,
gravi tamen et perenni obprobrio et ad omnium convicia exposito. Omitto Calvi Licini notissimos versus:
Bithynia quicquid
Et paedicator Caesaris umquam habuit.
Praetereo actiones Dolabellae et Curionis patris, in quibus eum
Dolabella 'pelicem reginae, spondam interiorem regiae lecticae,'
ac Curio 'stabulum Nicomedis et Bithynicum fornicem' dicunt.
Missa etiam facio edicta Bibuli, quibus proscripsit 'collegam
suum Bithynicam reginam, eique antea regem fuisse cordi, nunc
esse regnum. Quo tempore, ut Marcus Brutus refert, Octavius
etiam quidam, valitudine mentis liberius dicax, conventu maximo,
cum Pompeium regem appellasset, ipsum reginam salutavit. Sed
C. Memmius etiam ad cyathum et vinum Nicomedi stetisse obicit,
cum reliquis exoletis, pleno convivio, accubantibus nonnullis urbicis negotiatoribus, quorum refert nomina. Cicero vero non
contentus in quibusdam epistulis scripsisse, a satellitibus eum in
cubiculum-regium eductum in aureo-lecto, veste purpurea decubuisse, floremque aetatis a Venere orti in Bithynia contaminatum, quondam etiam in senatu defendenti ei Nysae causam, filiae
Nicomedis, beneficiaque regis in se commemoranti "Remove,"
inquit, "istaec, oro te; quando notum est, et quid ille tibi et
quid illi tute dederis." Gallico denique triumpho milites eius
inter cetera carmina, qualia currum prosequentes ioculariter canunt, etiam illud vulgatissimum pronuntiaverunt:
Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem:
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat qui subegit Gallias,
Nicomedes non triumphat qui subegit Caesarem.]
50. Auli Gabini: the author of the famous law investing
Pompey with extraordinary powers against the pirates. Cic.
Leg. Man. 17. 52. Marci Bruti matrem: so that Brutus was
popularly believed to be Caesar's son. Cf. note on § 82.-
Tertia deducta: a double pun, for not only is Tertia a proper
name as well as suggestive of tertia (pars), but deducta has, besides its ordinary meaning, an indecent one, as in Calig. § 25,
Liviam ad se deduci imperavit. Macrob. Sat. 2. 2. 5 gives Cicero's
words as Quo melius emptum sciatis, comparavit Servilia hunc fundum tertia deducta. Cicero's fondness for puns and rather cheap
wit is noticed by many of the ancient writers. Quintilian says of
him (6. 3. 3): non solum extra iudicia sed in ipsis etiam orationibus habitus est nimius risus affectator. A collection of his puns
is also mentioned by the same writer (6. 3. 5) in his chapter de
Risu: libertus eius Tiro aut alius, quisquis fuit, qui tres hac de
re libros edidit; and in 8. 6. 73: Cicero in quodam ioculari libello.
Macrobius, in the chapter cited above, has preserved a number of
these jokes, as has Plutarch in his Life of Cicero, which see, especially 38. When Cicero joined Pompey at the time of the
civil war, his cutting jests were exceedingly distasteful to that
general, who is reported as having said: Cupio ad hostes Cicero
transeat ut nos timeat! See Mayor's note on Cic. Philipp. 2.
16., and Klotz, Fragm. p. 295. - conciliare: for the word in
this sense cf. Catull. 68. 130.
51. iactato aeque a militibus. Even in the most despotic
period of the later Empire there seem to have been two occasions
when popular license of speech was not checked at the games
and on the occasion of a triumph. For the former see Tib.
§47, where it is stated that Tiberius was forced to manumit
the comic actor Actius by reason of the clamor of the people
(see also Inge, Roman Society, pp. 82-83); and for the latter,
Martial's epigram (1. 4), in which he asks that Caesar will read the
poet's verse with the same indulgence that he grants to the soldiers on the occasion of a triumph: Consuevere iocos vestri quoque ferre triumphi Materiam dictis nec pudet esse ducem. With
the verse given in the text may be compared many of the songs
popular among the English sailors of Nelson's time, and the barrack songs of the British army.
52. Dilexit. This use of the verb is not that which is more
common in classical Latin. As a rule, diligo is rather “ regard,"
" esteem," or "love" as between relatives (cf. Ter. Andr. 1. 5.
57. te in germani fratris dilexi loco), as ἀγαπάω in Greek,
while amo rather represents ἐράω. But Suet. several times uses
diligo of sexual love, as here, and in the passage just preceding
this, dilexit Serviliam, § 50. -ut Naso scripsit. M. Actorius
Naso mentioned in § 9. -nave thalamego : “ a cabined ship."
thalamegus is best taken here as an adjective, retaining the same
form that it would have in Greek, where it is an adj. of two terminations. It is found in Strabo, however, as a substantive.
The pure Latin expression is navis cubiculata, which occurs
only in Sen. de Benev. 7. 20. 3. - Aethiopia tenus: tenus
regularly follows its case, as do erga and penes often. Cicero
uses propter post-positively with pronouns, and rarely ante,
circa, circum, contra, and de with relatives. Cf. Roby, 1805.
-penetravit. For penetrasset, the apodosis of nisi recusasset
infra. For this irregular construction see Galba, § 10, servi
transeuntem paene interemerunt nisi expressa cruciatu confessio
esset. Hase cites Tacit. Ann. 16. 32: in amplexus ... filiae
ruebat nisi interiecti lictores utrisque obstitissent. See Roby,
1574., A. and G. 308, b., and the examples cited in both these
grammars. incessu: "mien." For this rendering, which is
not recognized in the lexicons, where incessus is restricted to
“
..
pace," "gait," cf. incessu commodo Domum servavit in the
epitaph given in the Corp. Inscript. Lat. 1007. - C. Matius: an
intimate friend of Cicero, of Caesar, and later of Augustus. A
letter of his to Cicero is preserved (ad Fam. 11. 28). — С. Орpium: cf. Tacit. Ann. 12. 60, and Cic. ad Att. 4. 16.-Helv.
Cinna: cf. § 85, where he is torn to pieces by mistake after Caesar's death. Not the poet of the same name (Teuffel, § 210,
2). liberorum quaerendorum causa: a stock phrase among the
Roman writers, and originally used in the oath made before the
censors regarding a man's marriage. So Sp. Carvilius is famous
for his divorce on the ground that he had sworn to the censor
that he had married liberorum quaerundorum causa ; so that having no children he was forced by religious scruples to put away
his wife. On this, see Gell. 4. 3, and for the phrase cf. liberorum
sibi quaesendûm gratia, Ennius, Frag. 120 (Ribbeck, Trag. Rom.
Frag.); liberorum quaesundûm causa, id. 97; liberorum quaerundorum causa ei uxor data, Plaut. Capt. 4. 2. 109.
53. vini parcissimum. For the genitive cf. A. and G. 218. c.
Hk. 399. I. 3. So pauper aquae, Hor. C. 3. 30. 11. Velleius says
(2.41): Magno illi Alexandro sed sobrio neque iracundo simillimus.
This indifference to the pleasures of the table forms one of the
innumerable minor points of resemblance between Napoleon and
Caesar. It cannot be said, however, that the Romans as a nation
were given to hard drinking. It was, on the contrary, made the
subject of unfavorable comment if a man neglected to dilute his
wine with water (vina castrari, Plin. H. N. 19. 4. 19). Three Romans are especially noted for their propensity to drunkenness.
The first is Antony whom Cicero taunts so bitterly on this failing in
the Second Philippic. When intoxicated, he rode up and down
the city in his chariot, and, so far from being ashamed of it, wrote
a book on the subject of his own drunkenness (Pliny, H. N. 14.
22). The second is Cicero's son, to whom the treatise de Officiis is inscribed, and who thought to avenge his father's death on
Antony by eclipsing the latter's reputation as a drunkard. The
third is the Emperor Tiberius, who, when young, had his name
punningly changed by the soldiers from Tiberius Claudius Nero
to Biberius Caldius Mero. (Tib. § 42; Pliny, H. Ν. 14. 22,
143; and the carmen ineditum, cited by Burmann.)-conditum
oleum: i.e., laid away and kept too long; hence, stale. Plutarch tells this story, and adds that Caesar rebuked his friends
for grumbling, saying: "It is quite enough not to eat what you
do not like; to criticise another's lack of breeding shows that
one also lacks it himself."-viridi: "fresh," and so used of
cheese in Columella, 7. 8. 1.
54. imperiis: in the provinces;
-monumentis: "his memoirs."
word.
ble noun.
magistratibus, in the city.
promercale: Post Aug.
"He offered it for sale at retail." - pondo: indeclinaSo in Cic. pro Cluent. 64. 179, auri quinque pondo.
55. Eloquentia. So Quint. Inst. 10. 1. 114. C. vero Caesar
si foro tantum vacasset, non alius ex nostris contra Ciceronem
nominaretur; tanta in eo vis est, id acumen, ea concitatio ut illum
eodem animo dixisse quo bellavit appareat; exornat tamen haec
omnia mira sermonis cuius proprie studiosus fuit, elegantia.
also id. ib. 2. 25, and 12. 10. 11. -principibus patronis: the
word patronus comes to be equivalent to advocatus and orator
from the necessity imposed upon the patronus of appearing for his
cliens on occasion in the courts. Both terms then, patronus and
cliens, take on a legal signification. - Cicero ad Brutum.
Chap. 75. The passage reads: Caesar autem rationem adhibens consuetudinem vitiosam et corruptam pura et incorrupta consuetudine
emendat. Itaque cum ad hanc elegentiam verborum Latinorum
See
...
adiungit illa oratoria ornamenta dicendi, tum videtur tamquam tabulas bene pietas collocare in bono lumine. Hanc cum habeat praecipuam laudem in eommunibus, non video cui debeat
cedere. Splendidam quandam minimeque veteratoriam rationem
dicendi tenet, voce, motu, forma etiam magnificam et generosam
quodammodo. Cf. also Tac. Dial. 21. dum taxat. Originally
a legal term meaning "while one estimates." In ordinary language it means either " so far as," as in Lucret. 2. 123, dumtaxat
rerum magnarum parva potest res; " only," " merely," as in
the passage before us; and "at least" = saltem, as in Aug. § 66,
aumtaxat modica. The word is rather a favorite with Suet. Cf.
§ 75. Cicero uses the word in all its meanings, but Caesar has it
only once (Bell. Civil. 2. 41). — Strabonis Caesaris. Cf. Cic. Brut.
48, orator minime vehemens sed nemo lepore conditior. The oration
pro Sardis is mentioned by Cic. De Offic. 2. 14. 50; Tusc. Disp.
5. 37. 108. It was delivered by C. Julius Caesar Strabo against
T. Albucius for extortion practised against the Sardinians in
his propraetorship, B. C. 133, and resulted in the exile of Albucius. The case is also alluded to in the orations against
Verres. He wrote tragedies, as we learn from Asconius, of
which the titles of three are known-the Adrastus, Tecmessa,
and Teuthras. ad verbum: "word for word." So verbum
de verbo (Ter. Adelph. prol. II); verbum e verbo (Cic. Acad.
2. 10. 31); verbum pro verbo (Cic. De Optim. Gen. Orat. 5.
14); verbum verbo (Horace, Ars Poet. 133). The adverb
verbatim is not classical Latin. - in divinationem suam:
"to his preliminary oration." The word divinatio as a legal
tech. term means the examination held to decide which of
several accusers should be allowed to conduct the case against
the defendant. When Cicero was preparing the prosecution of
“
Verres, the friends of the latter put forward a sham accuser in
the person of Q. Caecilius Niger, who, if permitted to conduct
the case, would have made a farce of it. Against this trick
Cicero pronounced the oration entitled the Divinatio in Caecilium, which secured to himself the right to prosecute. It was
on this occasion that he perpetrated his pun Quid Iudaeo cum
verre?-verres meaning a boar-pig, and Niger being a Jew.
The Divinatio of Caesar referred to in the text is probably that
against Dolabella, whose prosecution is mentioned in this chapter and in § 4. temere : improperly." Pro Q. Metello :
see § 16. actuaris : "short-hand writers;" also known as notarii, and in Gk. as ταχύγραφοι, and σημειογράφοι (Plutarch, Cat. Min. 23). The invention of notae (see infra, § 56) is
generally ascribed to Tiro, the freedman of Cicero, from whom
we have a collection of abbreviations under the title of Notae
Tironianae. See Kopp, Lexicon Tironianum, in his Palaeographia Critica, Mannheim, 1817. Isidorus (Orig. 1. 22) says: vulgares notas Ennius primus mille et centum invenit. Notarum usus
erat ut quidquid pro contione aut in iudiciis diceretur, librarii
scriberent simul astantes, divisis inter partibus quot quisque
verba et quo ordine exciperet. Romae Tullius Tiro, Ciceronis libertus, commentus est notas sed tantum praepositionum. Post
eum Vipsanius, Philargyrus, et Aquila, libertus Maecenatis,
alius alias addiderunt. Denique Seneca contracto omnium digestoque et auctore numero opus effecit in quinque milia.
The
Ennius mentioned above is not the poet, though often mistaken
for him, but is rather the later grammarian mentioned by Suetonius, Grammat. § 1, as the author of two books on letters and
syllables. Quint. (Inst. 11. 2. 25) says: Habeamus enim sane ut
qui notis scribunt certas imagines omnium et loca scilicet infinita per quae verba quot sunt in quinque contra Verrem secundae actionis libris explicentur ut meminerimus etiam omnium
quasi depositorum, etc. See also the Epigram of Ausonius
(146), Ad Notarium, beginning:
Puer, notarum praepetum
Sollers minister, advola.
Bipatens pugillar expedi
Cui multa fandi copia
Punctis peracta singulis
Ut una vox absolvitur,
Valerius Probus de Jur. Not. Signif. 1. (quoted by L. and S. s.
v. nota), says: apud veteres cum usus notarum nullus esset propter scribendi difficultatem ... quaedam verba atque nomina ex
communi sensu primis litteris notabant et singulae litterae quid
significarent in promptu erat.
Suet. (Tit. § 3) alludes to true
stenographic signs: E pluribus comperi notis quoque excipere
velocissime solitum (Titum) cum amanuensibus suis per ludum
iocumque certantem. The Aquila mentioned in the passage
above, cited from Isidorus, is the freedman of Maecenas spoken
of in Dio Cass. 55. 7, where, however, Maecenas himself is said
to have been the inventor of the system which Aquila afterward
taught: πρῶτος σημεῖά τινα γραμμάτων πρὸς τάχος
ἐξεῦρε καὶ αὐτὰ διὰ ᾿Ακύλου ἀπελευθέρου συχνοὺς
ἐξεδίδαξε. Seneca (Epist. 20) credits the invention to freedmen: Quid verborum notas, quibus quamvis citata excipitur
oratio? Vilissimorum mancipiorum ista commenta sunt. Suidas s. v. ᾿Ακύλας, possibly alludes to the same person: ᾿Ακύλας γραμματικὸς καὶ μουσικός. And again: φιλόσοφος,
σχόλια λογικὰ γεγραφὼς περὶ συλλογισμῶν (p. 188
Bnh.). Isidorus in the first book of the Origines devotes six
chapters (21-26) to the different kinds of notae, distinguishing
them respectively as notae sententiarum, e.g. asterisks, the
obelus, etc.; notae vulgares, short-hand; notae iuridicae, “abbreviations," e.g. B. F. infra, § 80; notae militares; notae litterarum, a method of secret writing as in the passage below and
Aug. § 88, on which Isidorus quotes a letter from Augustus to
Tiberius; notae digitorum, the sign-language in its widest sense,
used by the soldiers when on duty according to Isidorus.
the whole subject of ancient tachygraphy see the treatise of J. W.
Ziebig, Dresden, 1863; Teuffel, § 178. 4; and the chapters from
Isid. cited above, with the notes in the revision of F. Arevalus by
Migne, Paris, 1878. priore proelio: Ilerda. Cf. § 34.-
posteriore: Munda, cf. § 36.
On
56. Cicero in eodem Bruto: i.e., the same as quoted in the
preceding chapter. Brutus, 75. calamistris inurere: cf. Aug.
§ 86, myrobrechis cincinnos of Maecenas. - de Analogia duos
libros. In this book Caesar seems especially to have treated of
the importance of the right choice of words, and in it occurs his
famous dictum quoted by Gell. 1. 10. 4, that one should shun
every unusual word as if it were a reef. On this work of Caesar's,
cf. Cic. Brut. 72; and Gell. 9. 14. 25: 19. 8. 3; Quint. Inst. 1. 7.
34; and Macrob. Sat. 1. 5. 2. - Anticatones: cf. Juv. 6. 338,
majorem quam sunt duo Caesaris Anticatones. These pamphlets
seem to have been written to counteract the effect of Cicero's
eulogy on Cato, and to have been personal and scandalous
in the extreme. Pliny in one of his letters (3. 12) relates an
anecdote taken from one of the Anticatones, in which Cato is
charged with being found drunk in the street: quem tamen C.
Caesar ita reprehendit ut laudet. Describit enim eos quibus obvius fuerit, cum caput ebrii retexissent erubuisse : deinde adicit
`putares non ab illis Catonem, sed illos a Catone deprehensos.' On
which Pliny comments thus: potuitne plus auctoritatis tribui Catoni quam si ebrius quoque tam venerabilis erat?-роета :
Besides the poems mentioned in the text, Pliny in his Epistles
(5.3.5) implies that he wrote erotic poems. That he was
superior as a poet to Cicero we may infer from his epigrams,
which are undoubtedly genuine-one on Terence, given by
Suetonius in his Life of Terence, and the other beginning,
Thrax puer astricto glacie dum ludit in Hebro. Both are
excellent, and beautifully turned. -per notas scripsit: So of
Aug. § 88, per notas scribit. See the passage, and cf. Gellius,
17. 9. 1-5. Dicta Collectanea: called by Cicero (ad Fam.
9. 16. 4). ἀποφθέγματα: audio Caesarem cum volumina
iam confecerit 'Αποφθεγμάτων si quod afferatur ad eum pro
meo quod meum non sit reicere solere.Suetonius does not
mention a work on astronomy of which Macrobius speaks (Sat.
1. 16. 39).
57. capite detecto. Cf. Xen. Anab. 1. 8. 6 of Cyrus: Κῦρος
δὲ ψιλὴν ἔχων τὴν κεφαλὴν εἰς τὴν μάχην καθίστατο.
And so Sil. Ital. 1. 250 of Hannibal: tum vertice nudo Excipere
insanos imbres caelique ruinam. — incredibili celeritate. Another point of resemblance between Caesar and Napoleon.
Cicero, in one of his letters to Atticus (8. 9), calls Caesar hoc
τέρας horribili vigilantia, celeritate. innixus inflatis utribus.
Cf. Xen. Anab. 1. 5. 10, and for a mention of the fact in Caesar,
cf. the Bell. Civil. 1. 48. 7. Lusitani quibus erat proclive
tranare flumen quod consuetudo eorum omnium est ut sine utribus
ad exercitum non eant.
..
58. nisi ante per se portus...explorasset. Cf. Caes. B. G.
4. 21. C. Volusenum cum navi longa praemittit. Huic mandat uti exploratis omnibus rebus ad se quam primum revertatur.
cessantibus copiis: "delaying their coming."-obvoluto
capite: so capite obvoluto in Plaut. Most. 2. 1. 76.
gubernatorem cedere adversae tempestati. It was on this occasion that
Caesar uttered his famous exhortation to the pilot: “Quid
times? Caesarem vehis!" The story is told by Florus (4. 2. 37).
See also Plut. Caes. 38; Val. Max. 9. 8. 2.
59. Cum immolanti aufugisset hostia. An exceedingly bad
omen. If the victim even tugged at the rope when being led
to sacrifice, it was considered unfortunate, and hence a very
long slack rope was used. Cf. Juven. 12. 5. Sed procul extensum petulans quatit hostia funem. Cicero, Nat. Deor. 2. 3. 7, tells
of the great misfortune that befell P. Clodius Pulcher at Drepanum for neglecting the omen given by the sacred chickens, which
refused to eat when freed from the coop; whereupon mergi eos
in aquam iussit ut biberent quoniam esse nollent. So Suet. Tib.
§2. Also Cicero adds: Collega eius Iunius eodem bello nonne tempestate classem amisit cum auspiciis non paruisset ? and mentions
besides the similar case of C. Flaminius Nepos at Lake Trasimenus. In the third book of the same treatise (3.5) he again
expresses a conviction of the importance of portents. On
the other hand, in his work on divination (2. 71) he mentions
the terrible defeat of Paullus at Cannae as following a strict adherence to the auspices. Of the incident mentioned in the present passage, Cic. in the same book says: Ipse Caesar cum a
summo haruspice moneretur ne in Africam ante brumam transmitteret, nonne transmisit? Quod ni fecisset uno in loco omnes
adversariorum copiae convenissent. verso ad melius omine.
According to Frontin. (1. 12. 2) his words were: "Teneo te,
terra mater." Hase compares Dio Cass. 42. 58. despectissimum quendam ex Corneliorum genere. So Plutarch, Caes. 52.
"He was informed that the enemy relied greatly on an ancient
oracular saying that the race of the Scipios should be always
victorious in Africa. Now there was in his army a man, in other
respects low and despicable, but of the house of the Africani,
named Scipio Salutio. This man, it is difficult to say whether
in mockery of the Scipio who led the enemy, or to bring the
omen over to his own cause, he put at the head of his troops as
if he were general, in all the numerous battles which he was
obliged to fight." Much discussion has been expended on the
words Salvitoni cognomen by the commentators. Lipsius makes
the name Salacio, Gronovius Salaco, Voss Salicippius, and others
Salvitto, Salpitto, Salutio, or Solutio, desiring to connect the name
itself with salax, or σαλάκων, or at least to give it a meaning
appropriate to the passage. Pliny (H. N. 7. 12. 10), treating of
resemblances, says: Eiusdem familiae Scipioni post eum nomen
Salvitto mimus dedit, which is probably the true origin of the
name given because of the facial resemblance existing between
two men.
60. destinato: used for the much more common adverbial
phrase ex destinato, as in Calig. § 43. Probably written here
without the preposition in order not to clash with the ex occasione
immediately following. sumebat. So bellum sumi facile
(esse), Sall. Jug. 83. 1, and Tacit. Hist. 2. 42, proelium tamen
acriter sumpsere equos dimittebat. Cf. Caes. B. G. 1. 25.
Caesar primum suo, deinde omnium ex conspectu remotis equis, ut
aequato omnium periculo spem fugae tollerent, cohortatus suos
proelium commisit.
61. equo insigni. Pliny (H. N. 8. 42) mentions this remarkable horse, speaking in the same passage of Bucephalus.
63. vectoria navicula: "a transport," which Livy (24.40)
calls navis oneraria. The naves rostratae which Suet. mentions
in the next line are "men-of-war" = the naves longae of Caes.
and Livy.-et comminus: the et here = sed. Cf. Aug. § 66:
amicitias neque facile admisit et constantissime retenuit, and see
Introd. 17. This Cassius was subsequently one of Caesar's
murderers.
64. Alexandriae. "At Alexandria, at the assault on a
bridge."-mordicus. ὀδάξ. Florus says that Caesar left his
cloak floating on the water that the enemy might make it the
target of their missiles.
65. exactor disciplinae : "a martinet." - subtrahebat:
" stole away."
66. terribilis: "a source of alarm." Caesar's speech is in
marked contrast to the Napoleonic harangues, in its contemptuous
exaggeration of the enemy's force, Napoleon seems always to
have tried to rouse his soldiers' courage by belittling the enemy;
and on some occasions he purposely deceived them. Thus at
Waterloo, long after he knew the battle was lost, he gave out to
his troops that the Prussian guns, which they could plainly hear
thundering at Frichemont, were the cannon of Grouchy.
67. pro modo : "according to any fixed rule."
desertorum: desertor means one who simply abandons his army; transfuga, one who goes over to the enemy.conivebat: lit. he
"winked at." From the base NIC-which is found in the pft.
conixi and in nico with its frequentative nicto, to blink. (Cf.
Fick, I. 65.) The word came into English through the French
conniver, about Shakspeare's time, and is found once in his
plays-Winter's Tale, 4. 3, where Autolycus says, "Sure the
gods do this year connive at us, and we may do anything."
-commilitones: which Augustus (Aug. § 25) considered too
familiar. So Napoleon won much popularity for himself by addressing his soldiers as camarades, enfants, vieilles moustaches,
and other equally familiar names.barbam capillumque summiserit. And so Augustus after the defeat of Varus, on which
see Aug. § 23.
66
68. e viatico suo : here in the sense of peculio or stipendio.
So Horace, Epist. 2. 2. 26. Luculli miles collecta viatica multis
Aerumnis.cum tenuiorum, etc.: "while those who were
better off took upon themselves the care of the poor." -Dyrrachina munitione. Plutarch says: Pompey took care that
neither the loaves nor the words should reach his men, who were
disheartened and discouraged by reason of the terror inspired
by the ferocity and hardiness of their foes, whom they regarded
as a kind of savage beasts." - panis ex herba. See Caes. Bell.
Civil. 3. 48: Est etiam genus radicis inventum ab iis qui fuerant
cum Valerio quod appellatur ‘chara' quod admixtum lacte multum inopiam levabat. Id ad similitudinem panis efficiebant, etc.
So on the retreat from Russia, the soldiers of Napoleon's army
made a salad of grass. Pliny (H. N. 19. 8) calls the herb lapsana, on which see Varro, R. R. 3. 16. 25, the Gk. λαμψάνη
(Dioscorid. 2. 142, ed. Sprengel); also cuma silvestris, or wild
cabbage.--consolandos eos: so Caes. Bell. Civil. 3. 73. and
Appian. centum ac triginta millia: Caesar himself (Bell.
Civil. 3. 53) gives the number as about 30,000, -Cassi Scaevae.
See Lucan, 6. 144 sq.; and for the exploit of Acilius, Valer.
Max. 3. 2. 22. - Cynaegiri exemplum: given by Herod. 6. 114:
τοῦτο δὲ Κυναίγειρος ὁ Εὐφορίωνος ἐνθαῦτα, ἐπιλαβόμενος τῶν ἀφλάστων νηὸς, τὴν χεῖρα ἀποκοπεὶς πελέκεϊπίπτει. Cynaegirus was the brother of the dramatist
Aeschylus. umbone: umbo = ἄμβων.
69. atque etiam : " but even."
apud Placentiam: B.C. 48.
-missam fecit = exauctoravit as in Aug. § 24, where also
occurs dimisit.
70. decimanos: "the men of the tenth legion." - ardente
bello: cf. Cic. pro Sull. 19, cum arderet acerrime coniuratio.
-Quirites, i.e., "citizens." Lampridius tells the same thing
of Alexander Severus (Alex. Sev. 53): cum nihilominus post ista
fremerent, exclamavit, “Quirites, discedite atque arma deponite!" Mirando exemplo depositis armis, depositis etiam sagulis
militaribus omnes non ad castra sed ad diversoria varia recesserunt.
71. inter officia prosequentium: "among the attendants who
escorted him." Equivalent to inter eos qui officii causa prosequebantur. For the ceremony of escorting one who went forth
to assume an important command, cf. Livy, 42. 49.
72. deversoriolo. The MSS. have et in diversorio loco quod
unum erat, cesserit. Roth, following Oudend., reads deversoriolo
१०. Suetonius has the word diversorium twice elsewhere (Nero,
§ 38 and Vitell. § 7) in the sense of hospitium. BaumgartenCrusius reads et deversoriolo quod unum, etc., with Casaubon.
73. Simultates contra nullos. This reading of course makes
contra a preposition. The majority of the MSS. have it so, and
there seems to be no good reason for reading with Roth and others nullas, making contra the adverb.Gai Memmi : cf. § 23.
-versiculis: the scurrilous poem alluded to is found in Catull. 29 (Müller), and consists of twenty-four lines. Allusions to
Caesar are also found id. 11. 10, Caesaris visens monimenta
magni; 57. 2, a scandalous attack; and in 93, where he sums up
his contempt for Caesar in an epigram:
Nil nimium studeo Caesar tibi belle placere,
Nec scire utrum sis albus an ater homo.
This last effusion is also mentioned by Quintilian, II. 1. 38: Negat se magni facere aliquis poetarum utrum Caesar ater an albus
homo sit, insania ; verte, ut idem Caesar de illo dixerit arrogantia est. And cf. Phaedr. Fab. 3. 15. 10. --perpetua stigmata
imposita: sc. esse.
74. Cornelio Phagitae: cf. § 1. -a manu servum : "an
amanuensis." Suet. appears to have coined the word amanuensis, which is found only in the Lives. Cf. Nero, § 44: ne dispensatoribus quidem aut amanuensibus exceptis; and Tit. § 3.
The use of a in the phrase a manu servum is idiomatic. Cf.
Narcissum ab epistolis et Pallantem a rationibus, i.e., Narcissus,
the secretary, and Pallas, the accountant," in Claud. § 28; servus a pedibus, "a courier," Cic. ad Att. 8. 5. 1.; a potione, a
cup-bearer," Inscript. Grut. 578. 1.; a bibliotheca, “a librarian,"
Inscript. Orell. 40. --simplici morte: i.e., not having him first
scourged under the furca, as was commonly the practice.in
Publium Clodium: cf. § 6. — mater Aurelia : who had been the
one to discover his presence in the house in disguise.
“
75. Denuntiante Pompeio: cf. Caes. Bell. Civil. 1. 33, Pompeius discedens ab urbe in Senatu dixerat eodem se habiturum
loco qui Romae remansisset et qui in castris Caesaris fuissent.
So Plutarch, Pomp. 61, προειπὼν ὅτι Καίσαρος ἡγήσεται
τὸν ἀπολειφθέντα.-medios et neutrius partis: So in Nero,
§ 2: Cn. Pompeio de mediis ac neutram partem sequentibus, etc.
-ordines: "commands." - Afranius et Petreius: in Spain.
Cf. Caes. B. C. 1. 75, 76, 77. Acie Pharsalica: Florus (4.
2. 50) gives his words as " Miles, faciem feri!" before the battle;
and in the moment of victory, "Parce civibus." On his command to strike at the faces of the enemy, Plutarch says: "Caesar's cohorts... did not hurl their javelins at a distance, nor
strike at the thighs and legs as they usually did in close combat,
but aimed at the faces. For thus Caesar had instructed them,
hoping that the young patricians, who had not had much experience of battles and wounds, but came wearing their hair long,
in the flower of their youth and the prime of their good looks,
would be more fearful of such blows and not be anxious to hazard
both a present danger and a future blemish. And so it turned
out, for they were so far from bearing the strokes of the javelins
that they could not endure the sight of them, but turned about
and covered their faces to make them safe." See also Velleius,
2. 52. Lucio Caesare. The son of L. Caesar, mentioned in
Caes. B. G. 7. 65. Faustus was a son of Sulla the dictator,
according to Eutropius, 6. 23. - Aulique Caecinae. libro.
Probably a son of the Caecina in whose behalf Cicero pronounced an oration relating to a question of inheritance. On
the book mentioned in the text see Cic. ad Fam. 6. 5-8, letters
to and from this Caecina, who on account of his attack on Caesar
had been forbidden to return to Italy. He then published a retraction in the form of a poem, Querellae. Whether or not it was
successful in appeasing Caesar is not known, but Cicero gives
Caecina reason for hope, speaking especially of Caesar's mild
and forgiving disposition. civili animo = leniter. The use of
civilis in the sense of " courteous," "kindly," is exceedingly frequent in Suet onius. Cf. civilis et clemens, Vesp. § 12; ab iuventa mi-nime civilis animi, Domit. § 12. So in Greek, κοινός,
for which see Isocrat. 98 Β., κοινὸς ἅπασι γενέσθαι.
..
76. Praegravant : "preponderate." -praefecturam morum. The power of a censor without the title. See Aug.
§ 27, recepit et morum legumque regimen quamquam sine
censurae honore. -praenomen Imperatoris. From this time an
essential portion of the name, and not a temporary title, as
before. Patris Patriae: the title given to Cicero by Q. Catulus
(Cic. pro Sest. 57), but not as Pliny (7. 30) thinks, as a new
title never before conferred on any Roman. Livy ascribes the
title to Romulus (1. 16): Romulus, Quirites, parens urbis huius;
and to Camillus (5. 49): parens patriae . . . appellabatur. Cicero
himself (pro C. Rabir. 10) ascribes it to Marius. Tiberius declined the honor (Tib. § 26): cognomenque ‘patris patriae'...recusavit; as did also Nero (Nero, § 8): 'patris patriae' nomine
recusato propter aetatem. Tacitus (Annal. 1. 14) says that
Livia, the wife of Augustus, received the name of 'Mater Patriae.' Some of the later empresses were called by the title
'Mater Castrorum.' — statuam inter reges: which need not,
however, be considered an assumption of regal distinction,
as Suetonius seems to imply, for the statue of the older Brutus
had likewise been placed there. Cf. Plutarch, Brut. 1, Βροῦτος ὂν ἀνέστησαν ἐν Καπιτωλίῳ χαλκοῦν οἱ πάλαι
Ρωμαῖοι μέσον τῶν βασιλέων.—suggestum in orchestra: called cubiculum in Nero, § 12. A raised couch.-pulvinar: a cushioned seat in the circus, but suggesting the idea
،،
of divinity, as being originally a couch for the images of the
gods. Cf. Aug. § 45.- flaminem: cf. Cic. Philipp. 2. 43:
Quem is maiorem honorem consecutus erat quam ut haberet pulvinar, simulacrum, fastigium, flaminem? Est ergo flamen, ut
Jovi, ut Marti, ut Quirino, sic Divo Iulio M. Antonius.—
lupercos: Priests of the Roman Pan, who was called Lupercus as
being the destroyer of wolves, like Apollo Λύκειος. Originally there were two colleges of the Luperci, known respectively
as the Fabiani and the Quintiliani. To these the third sodality
was added in Caesar's honor, called the Juliani. On the Luperci
and the Lupercalia see Aug. § 31 fin., and Ovid, Fast. 2. 267
sq.
appellationem mensis e suo nomine: the month of July
(mensis Iulius), formerly known as mensis Quintilis from its
place in the old calendar. So the mensis Sextilis was renamed
after Augustus, the month September after Germanicus (Calig.
§ 15), and the month October after Domitian (Domit. § 13, Маcrobius, 1. 12). Tiberius used his right of intercessio to prevent the renaming of September after him, and October after
his mother Livia (Tib. § 26). - titulo tenus: titularly."
ad libidinem. Cf. Livy, 25. 21: instruitur acies ad libidinem,
and Sallust, Cat. 8: fortuna res cunctas ex libidine magis quam
ex vero celebrat. in paucas horas petenti dedit: The name of
this person was C. Caninius Rebilus, as stated by Macrobius, 2.
3, Caninius Rebilus uno tantum die consul fuit. On this brief
term of office Cicero made one of his characteristic jokes (cf.
Fam. 7. 30): Vigilantem habemus consulem Caninium qui in
consulatu suo somnum non vidit. decem praetoris viris:
known as the Decemviri Stlitibus Iudicandis. Cf. Aug. § 36.
-quosdam e semibarbaris Gallorum: semibarbaris Gallorum
is a Greek construction like the barbara virginum of Hor.
C. 1. 29. 5 and 6. On the passage edd. quote Cic ad Fam. 9.
15: in urbem nostram est infusa peregrinitas nunc vero etiam
bracatis et transalpinis nationibus. peculiares servos: peculiaris servus is opposed to servus publicus, as being the personal
slave of an individual. demandavit: "entrusted." A favorite word of Suet., and found oftener in him than in any other
writer. Cf. § 83; Aug. § 10; Tiber. § 51; Nero, § 35; Calig.
§ 9; Otho, § 3.
77. impotentiae: "arrogance," i.e., impotentia sui, lack of
self-restraint. Cf. Cic. Tusc. Disp. 4. 15. 34; impotentia quaedam animi a temperantia et moderatione plurimum dissidens.
Nero, § 28, ferox atque impotens mulier; and so Horace of Cleopatra (C. 1. 37. 10) quidlibet impotens Sperare fortunaque dulci
Ebria. And so ἀκρατής in Greek as opposed to έγκρατης, for which see Aesch. Prom. 884, πνεύματι μαργῳ,
γλώσσης ἀκρατής. - Ampius: Of whom Caesar speaks
(Bell. Civil. 3. 105), and to whom Cicero addresses a letter (ad
Fam. 6. 12). Sullam nescisse litteras: i.e., had not profited
by the teachings of history. Or possibly, as some edd. have
suggested, nescire litteras is proverbial for stultus esse.
si pecudi cor defuisset: a pun, of course, as cor means both "heart,"
and "mind" = sapientia. For a like pun see Mart. 2. 8. 6.
78. aede Veneris: cf. § 61. - Pontium Aquilam: afterward
one of Caesar's assassins. Cf. Appian, 2. 113.
79. in sacrificio Latinarum : the feriae Latinae, traditionally
dating from the time of Tarquinius Superbus. After holding
the Feriae Latinae, the consuls could enter upon the actual command of the army, at least before the time of Sulla, B.C. 82.
See Dict. of Antiq. s. v. Feriae. ------capiti suo diadema reppulerit.
So Cic. in Philipp. 2. 34.87. At etiam adscribi iussit in fastis ad
Lupercalia: C. Caesari, DICTATORI PERPETUO, M. ANTONIUM
CONSULEM POPULI IUSSU REGNUM DETULISSE, CAESAREM UTI
NOLUISSE. Cf. Shaksp. Jul. Caes. I. 2, where Casca describes
the scene: "It was mere foolery. I did not mark it. I saw
Mark Antony offer him a crown;-yet 'twas not a crown neither.
-'twas one of these coronets; and, as I told you, he put it by at
once; but, for all that, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay
his fingers off it. And then he offered it the third time; he put
it the third time by; and still as he refused it the rabblement
hooted, and clapped their chapped hands, and threw up their
sweaty night-caps, and uttered such a deal of stinking breath
because Caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked Caesar, for he swooned, and fell down at it." - libris fatalibus:
i.e., Sibyllinis. On these see Gell. 1. 19.
80. dispersim : "here and there." - detrectante... flagitante: Chiasmus. Bonum factum: the formulaic beginning of
an edict, more commonly abbreviated and expressed by the letters B. F. or Q. B. F. In Vitell. § 14 a similar effusion is given:
libellus propositus est, ‘Et Chaldaeos dicere B. F. ne Vitellius
Germanicus intra eundem Kalendarum diem usquam esset.'—
bracas: the Scotch "breeks" and Eng. "breeches." This
word is said by some philologists to be the only word in Latin
of pure Keltic origin, the others being cognates. Cf. note on
alauda, § 24. It is the Gaelic breacan, a tartan plaid, and
hence was primarily named from the varied colors, breacan
being a derivative of breac, "spotted." Cf. the Welsh brech,
"brindled," and the French braques in colloq language, on
which Le Roux says: Braque = culotte, caleçon on haut-dechausses. 'Sortir d'une affaire braques nettes' signifie sortir
d'une affaire sans en recevoir de préjudice; si c'est un combat,
sans être blessé." (Dictionnaire Comique.) The verses quoted
by Suet. are trochaic tetrameters catalectic. The last word must
be scanned sumpserunt. Hark. 586. II. 4. — trimenstrique
consule: cf. § 76. - animadverti sc. consulem adesse. Pliny,
Panegyr. 61. speaks of sollemnis ille lictorum et praenuntius clamor.--Luci Bruti: L. Junius Brutus, who drove out the Tarquins. Plutarch adds that Brutus's own tribunal, on which as
praetor he sat, was filled every morning with slips inscribed,
"You sleep, Brutus," or "You are no true Brutus." Plutarch,
Brut. 9.-e ponte: a gangway at the Comitia over which the
voters passed to be polled.
81. evidentibus prodigiis. Cf. Shaksp. Jul. Caes. II. 2.
Calphurnia.
There is one within
Recounts most horrid things seen by the watch.
A lioness hath whelpèd in the streets,
And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead:
Fierce, fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
In ranks and squadrons and right forms of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol:
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
-Capys. See Verg. Aen. 10. 145. Et Capys, hinc nomen
Campanae ducitur urbi. And cf. Livy, 4. 37.
ubertimque
flere. Pliny, H. N. 8. 42, says that horses have a presentiment
of battles, and lament their lost masters with tears. Praesagiunt
pugnam et amissos lugent dominos lacrimasque interdum desiderio
fundunt. regaliolum. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον. regaliolus represents the Gk. βασιλίσκος, with which cf. the French roitelet (petit roi) as a name for the wren. Aristotle, H. A. 9. 1.
15, probably refers to the same bird, calling it πρέσβυς and
βασιλεύς, as in the same work, 8. 3. 5, he uses the word τύραννος in speaking of the crested wren. Cf. also Pliny, H.
N. 10. 74. cum litare non posset. Shaksp. blends this statement with the one in § 77.
Caes.
What say the augurers?
Serv. They would not have you stir forth to-day.
They could not find a heart within the beast.
Caes. The gods do this in shame of cowardice!
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home to-day for fear!
(Jul. Caes. II. 2.)
82. Cimber Tillius: cf. Cic. Philipp. 2. 11. 27. An L. Tillius Cimber me est auctorem secutus? Also Seneca de Ira, 3. 30:
Divum Iulium plures amici confecerunt quam inimici. Vidit
itaque strictis circa sellam suam gladiis commilitones suos, Cimbrum Tillium acerrimum paullo ante partium defensorem, aliosque post Pompeium demum Pompeianos. - Ista quidem vis
est! An almost formulaic cry of the Romans when suddenly attacked or taken by surprise. Cf. vis haec quidem herclest, said by
Tyndarus in Plaut. Capt. 3. 5.92. graphio: Suet. uses the Latin
word stilus at times, e.g. Aug. § 85, Tib. § 70; but oftener graphium, of which the pure Latin representative would be scriptorium. For the stile as a weapon see Calig. § 28: Cum discerpi
senatorem concupisset, subornavit qui ingredientem curiam repente hostem publicum appellantes invaderent, graphisque confossum lacerandum ceteris traderent. - καὶ σὺ τέκνον; Some
prefix to this καὶ σὺ εἶ ἐκείνων. Plutarch (Caes. 66) says
that Casca gave the first blow, that Caesar cried out in Latin,
"Base Casca, what dost thou?" while Casca cried to his brother
in Greek, ἀδελφέ, βοήθει. He gives no other words as said
by Caesar. There is absolutely no authority for attributing the
words "Et tu, Brute?" to Caesar. The strong popular belief
in their authenticity is a remarkable tribute to the genius of
Shakspeare, who puts them into Caesar's mouth at the moment
of his fall. But Shakspeare did not originate them. They
seem first to have occurred in an old Latin play on the subject of
Julius Caesar, written by Dr. Eades, the master of Christ
Church College, Oxford, in 1582, and acted in that year by the
undergraduates. They next appear in the Mirror for Magistrates, in the narrative called "Caesar's Legend," and published
five years later, in 1587. Again they are found in a poem by one
S. Nicholson, called Acolastus his Afterwit, which appeared in
1600. In this poem the lines run:
"Et tu Brute? Wilt thou stab Caesar, too?
Thou art my friend and will not see me wronged."
Shakspeare probably found them in The True Tragedie of Richard, Duke of Yorke, which appeared in 1600 (Malone), and from
which he drew the “Third Part of King Henry VI." In it is the
line:
"Et tu, Brute? Wilt thou stab Caesar, too?"
;
As Malone says, Shakspeare rejected the line in writing the play
just mentioned, but it seems to have lingered in his memory
and to have reappeared in the Julius Caesar, whence it passed
into the stock of quotations that are the property of all mankind. The exclamation given in the text is believed by many to
have been an acknowledgment of the relationship existing between Brutus and Caesar, by reason of the intrigue of Caesar
with Servilia, the mother of Brutus, mentioned in § 50. See
also note on § 14. Plutarch (Brut. 5) says that Caesar himself
believed Brutus to be his son: ἐγνώκει γὰρ, ὡς ἔοικε,
νεανίας ὢν ἔτι τὴν Σερβιλίαν ἐπιμανεῖσαν αὐτῶ
καὶ καθ᾽ οὓς μάλιστα χρόνους ὁ ἔρως ἐπέφλεγε γενόμενον τὸν Βροῦτον ἐπέπειστό πως ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ γεγονέναι. But as Caesar was barely fifteen years of age when
Brutus was born, it seems scarcely probable that any relationship existed between them. secundo loco. Cf. primo loco,
Juv. 5. 12. metu M. Antoni: whom they had intended to kill
as well as Caesar, as Plutarch tells us (Brut. 18), but were deterred by Brutus, καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις πᾶσιν ὁπηνίκα
διεσκοποῦντο τὴν πρᾶξιν, ἤρεσκεν ᾿Αντώνιον ἐπισφάττειν Καίσαρι . ᾿Αλλὰ Βροῦτος ἐνέστη πρὸς τὸ
βούλευμα, πρῶτον μὲν ἰσχυριζόμενος τῷ δικαίῳ δεύτερον δ᾽ ὑποθεὶς ἐλπίδα τῆς μεταβολῆς.
83. Labicano: sc. agro. Between Tusculum and Praeneste.
-Q. Tubero: the author of a historical work from the earliest
time extending to his own age, and also known as an orator, and
a writer on jurisprudence. Cf. Quintil. 10. 1. 23; II. 1. 80, and
Gell. 14. 2. 20. ex dodrante: i.e., ex tribus quadrantibus totius rei; terni quadrantes. in ima cera: cf. primae duae cerae,
Nero, § 17. On the first page, the testator usually wrote his
name, while the name of the principal heir appeared on the second. Martial, 4. 70 has nihil
pater ceris. plerosque = multos.
mentioned by Horace, Sat. 1. 9. 18.
moriens reliquit ultimis
hortos circa Tiberim.
On the Janiculum.
84. tropaeum: here evidently a post or pillar. Armorum
Iudicio: a play on the subject of the contest between Ulysses
and Ajax for the arms of Achilles. Sixteen fragments of the
play are extant. Appian (Bell. Civ. 2. 146) turns the line into
Greek: καὶ περὶ τῶν σφαγέων αὐτῶν ἐπέλεγεν ὥσπερ ἐν θαύματι· ῾ἐμὲ δὲ καὶ τούσδε περισῶσαι τοὺς
κτενοῦντάς με;' Cf. also Cic. Philipp. 2. 3. 5: Quod si esset
beneficium, numquam qui illum interfecerunt a quo erant conservati. ...tantam essent gloriam consecuti.pro salute unius :
sc. Caesaris. repente duo quidam: the absence of any noun
heightens the effect, and also preserves the author from committing himself as to whether or not the "duo" were supernatural
beings or men in disguise. The purpose of this performance
was, of course, to create a belief that Castor and Pollux had appeared. For a similar indefinite use of the numeral, very
cleveriy employed, see Pliny's celebrated ghost story (Epist. 7.
27) where venerunt per fenestras in tunicis albis duo.cereis :
sc. funibus. circulatim : "going round and round." Hase
aptly cites Caes. Bell. Civil. 1. 64, totis vero castris milites circulari et dolere. praecipueque Iudaei. Caesar was much esteemed by the Jews because he had exhibited great tolerance
and even esteem in his treatment of them. To the Jews in
Alexandria he had granted citizenship in that city; he had also
removed the restrictions placed upon the free exercise of their
worship at Paros and Delos. His popularity was naturally not
diminished by the fact that he had overthrown Pompey, who
had greatly offended the prejudices of the Jews by his conduct
when commanding in the East; for as Josephus tells us, he had
attacked the Temple, carrying it by assault, cutting the throats
of many persons in it, and "committing no small enormities
in the places about it." Pompey even insisted on passing
into the Holy of Holies, where it was unlawful for any but the
high-priests to enter; yet he did not touch any of the sacred
vessels, nor even carry away the 2000 talents of gold deposited
there-a fact stated also by Cicero. See Josephus, Antiq. 14.
4, and id. ib. 10. Also Fr. C. Meyer, Judaica, Jena, 1832.
85. Helvium Cinnam: see § 52. lapidis Numidici :
marble.
86. sua quam rei publicae interesse: cf. Cic. ad Fam. 2. 19,
quod ego et mea et rei publicae interesse arbitror.
87. apud Xenophontem : i.e., Cyrop. 8. 7.
88. stella crinita: So Pliny, H. N. 2. 25, sidus crinitum
per septem dies in regione caeli quae sub septentrionibus est conspectum... Eo sidere significare vulgus credidit Caesaris animam inter deorum immortalium memina receptam. Cf. Plut.
Caes. 69, and Verg. Geor. 1. 466:
Ille etiam exstincto miseratus Caesare Romam
Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque aeternam timuerunt saecula noctem.
89. obstrui placuit. Appian on the contrary says that it
was burnt by the populace. obstrui = obsaepi.sua morte:
" by a natural death." So Seneca, Epist. 69. 6, bella res est
mori sua morte. Damnati omnes: by the Lex Pedia as stated
by Vell. 2. 69. Cf. Nero, § 3: Is inter conscios Caesarianae necis quamquam insons damnatus lege Pedia, etc. -periit: attracted into the singular by the proximity of alius, though it
should be perierunt, otherwise omnes is a nominativus pendens.
Cf. with some edd. Cic. de Offic. 1. 41. Ut enim pictores et ii
qui signa fabricantur et vero etiam poetae suum quisque opus a
vulgo considerari vult. Madvig Gr. 217 obs. 1. Cf. also Cic.
de Fin. 5. 24; Livy, 7. 33. 12. eodem illo pugione: Plutarch,
Caes. 69, tells this of Cassius : Θαυμασιώτατον δὲ τῶν
μὲν ἀνθρωπίνων τὸ περὶ Κάσσιον· ἡττηθεὶς γὰρ ἐν
Φιλίπποις ἐκείνῳ τῷ ξιφιδίῳ διέφθειρεν ἑαυτὸν ᾧ
κατὰ Καίσαρος ἐχρήσατο.
