1. Velitris. In Latium. - rem divinam. So in Plaut. Capt.
4. 2. 80 and 81, iube Vasa tibi pura adparari ad rem divinam.
-prosecuit. A tech. term of the sacrifice. The flesh cut off
for sacrifice was known as prosicies and prosectum.
2. inter minores gentes. The minores gentes were the gentes
belonging to the third of the three early tribes. This third tribe
(Luceres) being regarded as inferior to the other two (the Ramnes
or Opician Latins, and the Titienses or Sabines), its gentes were
styled minores, as those of the other two were known as maiores.
Hence the phrase patres minorum gentium applied to the hundred senators added by Tarquinius Priscus according to Livy
(1.35). Cic. de Rep. 2. 20 (Mos.) says: L. Tarquinius duplicavit
illum pristinum patrum numerum et antiquos patres maiorum
gentium appellavit quos priores sententiam rogavit: a se ascitos
minorum. See also Cic. ad Fam. 9. 21. to Paetus. -Roth's
text has adlecta in senatum, but the words in senatum are inconsistent with the following in patricias traducta, which would be
tautologous because the senate at that time was open only to patricians. I have therefore omitted them. -ad plebem se contulit. A plebeian born could be made a patrician only by a lex
curiata, until the time when Caesar assumed the right of making
the transfer in his own name (Iul. § 41). A patrician became a
plebeian by adrogatio with his own consent, as in the case of P.
Clodius already mentioned in Iul. § 20. Possibly here the transfer was made because of the loss of the senatorial census.
Tac. Annal. 2. 38, speaking of the Hortensian house, uses the
expression pudendam ad inopiam delaberetur. And so instances
are not wanting of heirs to English peerages who refuse to
assume the title through lack of means to support their rank.
-condicione diversa. It was not unusual to find in the same
gens both patrician and plebeian families. So the famous gens
Cornelia contained not only the patrician Scipios and the Sullae,
but also the plebeian Balbi and Merulae. In Nero, § 1, Suet.
tells the same thing of the two branches of the gens Domitia, the
So
Calvini (plebeian) and the Aenobarbi (patrician). - stipendia
fecit. Cf. note, Iul. § 2. - Aemilio Papo imperatore. Livy,
28. 38. Sed haec alii: sc. tradiderunt. - ipse Augustus
in his Memoirs called in § 85 a treatise De Vita Sua in 12
books.-M. Antonius
exprobrat: i.e., in his edicts and
letters. Cf. §§ 7, 10, 16, 28, 69. Cicero in his third Philippic
(6) reproaches Antony for his disgraceful language toward
Octavius. At quam contumeliosus in edictis! quam barbarus! quam rudis! Primum in Caesarem maledicta congessit
deprompta ex recordatione impudicitiae et stuprorum suorum!
Quis etiam hoc adolescente castior? quis modestior? Ignobilitatem obicit C. Caesaris filio cuius etiam natura pater, si vita suppeditasset, consul factus esset. Aricina mater-Trallianam aut
Ephesiam putes dicere. Cremutius Cordus, cited by Tac. Annal.
4. 34, says, Antonii epistulae, Bruti contiones falsa quidem in
Augustum probra set multa cum acerbitate habent.avum argentarium: See the end of § 4 and the scurrilous line in § 70.
3. divisores operasque campestris : "bribe-givers and political
workers." In order to make the detection of bribery (ambitus)
more difficult, the "practical politicians" at Rome employed
three sets of agents, the " interpretes," who made the bargain
with the voter; the "sequestres," who held the cash until the
bargain had been consummated; and the "divisores," who paid
it over (Cic. pro Cluent. 26; ad Att. 1. 16). Observe the
euphemism in the terms employed to denote the several classes
of bribe-givers. Opera campestris" was the generic term for
a political “heeler."-innutritus. The participle means
"reared in," while in the adjective in is negative. Both are
post-Aug. adeptus est facile, etc. Chiasmus. -epistulae
M. Ciceronis: ad Q. Fr. I. 1. 7. --proconsulatum: more accurately propraeturam.
،،
4. consulatus. A. and G. 217. liberis. In partitive apOctavia
position with liberis are the names Octavia maiore
minore, Augusto. Roman women had, as a rule, only one
name-the feminine form of the father's gentile name. Hence
if there were several girls in the family they were distinguished
by an adjective or numeral as Maior, Minor, Prima, Secunda,
Tertia, Postrema, etc. After marriage they sometimes took a
praenomen formed from the husband's, e.g., Gaia, Publia; or a
cognomen formed from the husband's, e.g., Caecilia Metella; or
from the gentile name of the husband, e.g. Livia Ocellina, Julia
Claudilla; or (rarely) from some personal peculiarity of their
own, e.g., Rufa, Pusilla. Pliny (H. N. 34. II) says that one of
the privileges of the vestal virgins was the assumption of a praenomen upon their captio, as in the case of a bride at her marriage.-M. Atio Balbo. So Vergil (Aen. 5. 568) delicately
flatters Augustus by connecting the name Atius with that of
Atys, the friend of Iulus: Alter Atys genus unde Atii duxere
Latini, Parvus Atys, pueroque puer dilectus Iulo. - Aricinus.
A town of Latium which had received the full Roman franchise
in 340 B.C. Cf. Cic. Philipp. 3. 6, cited above. inter viginti
viros agrum Campanum divisit. See note on Iul. § 20.
-unguentariam tabernam. Cicero (de Offic. 1. 42) classes
perfumers among the artes minime probandae quae ministrae
sunt voluptatum. He enumerates (quoting Terence) the cetarii, lanii, coqui, fartores, piscatores, and then says, adde huc, si
placet, unguentarios, saltatores totumque ludum talarium.
Many passages in Latin literature attest the extraordinary fondness of the Romans for perfumes and unguents of all kinds.
Nero in his dining-hall had a contrivance by which perfumes
were shed down upon the guests; and even in the theatres concealed pipes sprayed the spectators with saffron water.-nummulari. As a noun, the word is post-Aug., and in the present
passage means a money-changer; but often in Latin of a coiner.
So Mart. 12. 57. 7, where the noise made by the nummularius
is said to prevent sleep; and so Suet. Galb. § 9 tells how Galba
nummulario non ex fide versanti pecunias manus amputavit
mensaeque eius adfixit.-taxat: "twits." - collybo. A word
borrowed from the Greeks, who probably received it, as they
did many other words relating to trade and finance, from the
Phoenicians, as it is undoubtedly Semitic. κόλλυβος is small
change, and in Cic. Verr. 2. 3. 78, the rate of exchange, cognate
with the Hebrew chalaf, to change. Another frequently used
commercial term, evidently Phoenician, is arrhabo (arrha), ἀρραβών, cognate with the Semitic erabón, and meaning forfeitmoney, the Scotch arles, on which see Ramsay's note on Plaut.
Most. 3. 1. III. mensarius. A pure Latin term formed
from mensa, as is the Greek τραπεζίτης from τράπεζα, and
e
the English "banker" from banque, originally the money-changer's table or bench. See Fick, III. 201.
5. Natus est Augustus. Sept. 23, 62 B.C. -ad Capita Bubula: one of the fourteen regiones of the city. natales: 'his
family," as in Tac. Hist. 2. 86, aderat Corn. Fuscus vigens aetate, claris natalibus. In this sense a post-Aug. word.
soli
quod primum D. A. attigisset. Probably to be taken literally
with reference, as Baum. -Crus. shows, to the practice of placing
the newly born child upon the ground and invoking the favor of
the goddess Ops, who was identical with Terra, as appears from
Macrob. 1. 10. 19, 20: Saturnus eiusque uxor tam frugum quam
fructuum repertores esse credantur. Quos etiam non nullis caelum ac terram esse persuasum esse Saturnum a satu dictum cuius
causa de caelo est, et terram Opem cuius ope humanae vitae alimenta quaeruntur. In praying to her on any occasion it was
the custom to touch the earth. St. Augustine (de Civ. Dei, 4.
11) gives her the name Levana, as the one who raised the infants
from the ground. She was also styled Consiva (consero) or Consivia, as appears from Varro, L. L. 6. § 21 (Müll.).
6. cubitum. A. and G. 302.-cum strato simul : "bed
and all."
7. imagunculam. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον like statunculum in
Petron. Sat. 50. p. 34 (Bücheler). — principi. Hadrian. Augusti cognomen. Dio Cass. 53. 16, says that Augustus greatly
desired to be styled Romulus as being the second founder of the
State, but fearing that this would savor too much of kingly pretension, contented himself with the name Augustus, ὡς καὶ
πλεῖόν τι ἢ κατὰ ἀνθρώπους ὢν· πάντα γὰρ τὰ ἐντιμοτατα καὶ τὰ ἱερώτατα αὔγουστα προσαγορεύεται.
Ovid, Fast. I. 587 sqq., speaking of Roman agnomina, says of
the Emperor's name:
Sed tamen humanis celebrantur honoribus omnes;
Hic socium summo cum Iove nomen habet.
Sancta vocant AUGUSTA patres: AUGUSTA vocantur
Templa, sacerdotum rite dicata manu.
Huius et augurium' dependet origine verbi
Et quodcumque sua Iuppiter 'auget' ope.
'Augeat' imperium nostri ducis, 'augeat' annos
Protegat et vestras querna corona fores.
testamenta maioris avunculi. Cf. Iul. § 83. -augurato: adverbial like auspicato, Livy, 6. 41. 5. Ennius docet. Annales,
v. 494 (Vahlen).
8. aviam Iuliam. Cf. §4. Quint. Inst. 12. 6, says, Caesar
Augustus duodecim natus annos aviam pro rostris laudavit.-
militaribus donis. In §25 these are defined as phalerae, torques,
coronae, etc. See also Tib. § 32. - Apolloniam: in Illyricum.
-diu cunctatus: So Vell. 2. 59; Appian, 3. 10.-vitrico.
Perhaps vitricus is corrupted from patricus, with which cf. the
Greek πατρωός = πατρυιός in Plut. Cleom. 11.-cum M.
Antonio M. que Lepido. The famous Second Triumvirate, B.C.
43.
9. neque: "and not," by resolution. per species: “in
groups." These groups are as follows: Military exploits, §§ 9-
25; General administration, §§ 26-60; Private life, §§ 61-78;
Personal appearance, §§ 79-83; Education and writings, §§ 84-
89; Personal peculiarities, §§ 90-93; Portents regarding his
career, §§ 94-96; Last days, §§ 97-99; Funeral and will,
§§ 100, 101.
10. reosque caedis. For the genitive caedis cf. A. and G. 217.
-deferre. A technical term used in classical Latin with nomen,
as in Cic. in Pis. 33. 82. Without nomen the use is post-Aug.
-ludos. Cf. Iul. § 88. -in locum Tr. Pl. demortui. Helvius Cinna, who was torn to pieces by the people, as related in
Iul. § 85. translaticium ius: "and granting him not even
a share of common every-day justice." So in Nero, § 33, raptim inter maximos imbres translaticio extulit funere, i.e., by an
ordinary funeral. Roth reads translativum ius, "the right of
transfer," with no sufficient reason.-D. Brutum. Cf. Dio
Cass. 44. 14.
12. ceterosque duces: i.e., Plancus and Asinius Pollio, as
seen in Appian, Bell. Civ. 3. 97.-quasi alii se puerum... tollendum. So Vell. 2. 62, quoted by Baum-Crus. and others:
Hoc est illud tempus quo Cicero insito amore Pompeianarum partium Caesarem laudandum et tollendum censebat cum aliud diceret
aliud intellegi vellet. The point, of course, lies in the ambiguity
of tollere, which is either " to rear," " to recognize" = suscipere
(said of a father recognizing the new-born child), "to exalt;" or
"to destroy," " do away with" = auferre.
13. nita... societate. Cf. §8 fin. successum moderatus
est. In Augustan Latin, moderor in this sense takes the dative,
but in Tac. and Suet., the accusative. So in Claud. § 14: duritiam lenitatemve multarum moderatus est, a passage incorrectly
quoted by L. and S.; and in Domit. § 7: pretia moderatus est.
Cf. also Tac. Annal. 2. 75: gaudium moderans, and Livy, 42. 62.
-fore potestatem. The Cod. Memm. thus gives the passage. Oudend., with other MSS., reads in potestatem, a Greek
construction modelled after γενέσθαι eis, and found also
in Sallust, Jug. 112. Other edd., while retaining the in,
change potestatem to the abl. - micare. Dio Cass. 51. 2, relates this of Augustus and the two Flori: οἱ δὲ δὴ Φλῶροι
ὅτι τὸν ἕτερον τὸν λαχόντα κελεύσαντος αὐτοῦ
σφαγηναι, ἀμφότεροι διεφθάρησαν. ἦσαν μὲν γὰρ
πατήρ τε καὶ παῖς· ὡς δ᾽ οὗτος πρὶν λαχεῖν αὐτὸς ἑαυτὸν τῷ σφαγεῖ ἑκὼν παρέδωκε, περιήλγησέ τε ἐκεῖνος, καὶ αὐτοχειρίᾳ αὐτῶ ἐπεπέθανεν. A few MSS.
read dimicare, as also in Cic. de Offic. 3. 23: sed quasi sorte aut
micando victus, where dimicando is clearly wrong. Micare is to
play the game still so popular among the lower classes in Italy,
and known as la morra, in which the players simultaneously
raise several fingers, and at the same time call out a number.
The player whose number comes the nearest to the sum of all the
fingers held up is the winner. The game seems to have been
the same as that called par impar," or "odd or even, except that in “ par impar" other things than the fingers (e.g., astragali) were held up by a single person, the other player doing
the guessing. So Hor. Sat. 2. 3. 248, says Ludere par impar,
equitare in harundine longa, Siquem delectet barbatum, amentia
verset. Augustus in a letter given in § 71 fin., alludes to the
game.
See also Nux Eleg. 79: Est etiam par sit numerus qui
dicat an impar, Ut divinatas auferat augur opes. Cf. the proverbial expression micare in tenebris, used by Cic. de Offic. 3.
19: cum enim fidem alicuius bonitatemque laudant, 'dignum esse'
dicunt 'quicum in tenebris mices.' Fronto, in a letter to M. Caesar (p. 24, ed. Niebuhr), calls this a proverbium scurrarum. The
Greek term for the game is ἀρτιασμός, or ἄρτια ἢ περιττὰ
παίζειν, for which see Arist. Rhet. 3. 5. 4; Plat. Lys. 206 E;
and Aristoph. Plut. 816. In holding up the astragali, the player
"
said ποσίνδα; “how many times?" hence ποσίνδα παίζειν,
Xen. Eq. Mag. 5. 10 (Dind.). Another similar game of chance was
that corresponding with the modern " heads or tails," in which the
players tossed up a coin and called either capita or navia (phps.
navim), one side of the coin having originally borne the head
of Janus, and the other the figure of a ship. See Ovid, Fast. 1.
239, and Macrob. Sat. 1. 7. 22. The Greeks used instead of a coin
an oyster-shell black on one side and white on the other, whence
the terms ὀστρακίνδα παιδιά, and ὀστράκου περιστροφή, for which see Plat. Rep. 521 C. The Italian morra is the
French la mourre; jouer à la mourre (E. Legros). — ille Catonis aemulus. Hence known as Cato's Ape-simius Catonis.
Cf. Cic. ad Att. 1. 14., 2. 1., 2. 4., 4. 1.; ad Q. Fr. 2. 3. Favonius made himself a great nuisance to Pompey at the time of
the civil war by his impatience, unreasonableness, and sarcastic
speeches. Mommsen styles him "Cato's Sancho."-prosciderunt. A poetical expression for exprobraverunt. See Calig.
§ 30, and Vit. Lucani, p. 299, 1. 32 (Roth).
14. fame compulit. So that the expression "Perusina fames" became proverbial. See the line of Lucan (1. 41): Hic,
Caesar, Perusina fames Mutinaeque labores. So Florus (who
mistakes the date of the siege) says (4.5): intra Perusiae muros
redegit compulitque ad extrema deditionis turpi et nihil non experta fames.discruciatum necasset. Cf. discruciatos necaret,
Cic. Philipp. 13. 18.
15. una voce occurrens: occurrens = respondens as in Quint.
Inst. 1. 5. 36: ut si dicente, ‘Quem video?' ita occurras. Reitz
compares Verg. Aen. 12. 625, talibus occurrit dictis. utriusque ordinis: i.e., of the senatorial and equestrian orders. —
conpecto. A great variety of lections is to be observed here, the
MSS. giving conspecto, e conspectu, conspicato, ex consulto, ex proposito. The reading adopted in the text is the emendation of
Lipsius, in which he is followed by J. Gronovius, Oudendorp,
Wolf, and Roth. confiscatis. The verb confisco may almost
be styled a vox Suetoniana, as it is almost entirely confined to
the Lives. Cf. § 101; Tib. § 49; Calig. §§ 16 and 41; Domit.
§ 12. persolverentur : = solverentur.
16. Siculum bellum: with Sex. Pompey. Florus, 4. 8; Dio
Cass. 48. 15 sqq. - Naulochum; the name is found only here
—
in the singular, the usual form being the neut. plur. Naulocha.
- pompae simulacrum dei detraxerit. So when Germanicus
died, the people stoned the temples, destroyed the altars, and
threw many of the images of the household gods into the street
(Calig. § 5). Mr. Lecky, in his History of European Morals
(vol. i. pp. 167-171), has some interesting remarks on these and
similar occurrences. superbientem. Poetical. - relegavit :
"Banished." A technical term. Relegatio differed from deportatio in that the former did not involve loss of citizenship.
17. Bononiensibus gratiam fecit: "he even pardoned the people of Bologna." gratiam facere with the genitive of the offence
and the dative of the person is here used as in Sallust, Jug. 104
(Dietsch): Boccho quoniam paenitet, delicti gratiam facit. Hase
quotes Ovid, Trist. 1. 5. 39:
Saepe fidem adversis etiam laudavit in armis,
Inque suis amat hanc Caesar, in hoste probet.
-missionem poscentium: missio is the t. t. for a discharge from
military service, and is of three kinds, as stated in the Digest, 49.
16-honesta or justa, when the regular term of service has been
completed; causaria or gratiosa, a discharge obtained by favor
before the due time; and ignominiosa, a dishonorable discharge,
for which in the later writers the usual term is exauctoritas and
the verb exauctoro, as in § 24, Vitell. § 10, Vesp. § 8. armamentis: "the tackle." -Et Antonium quidem
Cleopatra. The
quidem implies a corresponding autem with Cleopatra, answering
to the Gk. μέν ... δέ. So quidem ... sed = μέν ... ἀλλά.
-Psyllos. The Gk. Ψύλλοι. Pliny (Η. N. 7. 2. 13) speaks
of a people known as Ophiogenes as being able serpentium ictus
contactu levare et manu imposita venena extrahere corpore. He
adds: Similis et in Africa Psyllorum gens fuit ut Agatharcides
scribit, a Psyllo rege dicta. Horum corpori ingenitum fuit virus
exitiale serpentibus et cuius odore sopirent eas.... Et tamen omnibus hominibus contra serpentes inest venenum feruntque ictus
salivae ut ferventis aquae contactum fugere. Quod si in fauces
penetraverit etiam mori idque maxime humani ieiuni oris. A
line of Cinna is quoted by Gellius (9. 12. 12) as follows:
Somniculosam ut Poenus aspidem Psyllus.
Cf. also Lucan, 9.925.-perisse morsu aspidis putabatur. There
is no good authority for attributing the death of Cleopatra to
the famous asp, but the story seems to have been universally
accepted. Cf. Vell. 2. 87; Hor. Carm. 1. 37. 27; Plut. Ant.
86. Caesarionem. Cf. Iul. § 52. Dio Cass. 49. 32, states
that Cleopatra had three children by Antony, a daughter, Cleopatra, and two sons, the names of the latter being given also
in the Epitome of Livy, 132, as Philadelphus and Alexander.
(Baum-Crus.) Aegyptum in provinciae formam. See note
on Iul. § 11.
19. alias alio tempore. On Lepidus, see Vell. 2. 88; on
Varro Murena, infra, § 56, § 66; Tib. § 8; Vell. 2. 91; on Fannius Caepio, Tib. § 8; on M. Egnatius, Vell. 2. 92; on Plautius
Rufus, Dio Cass. 55 27, where the name is given as Publius
Rufus; on Lucius Paulus, his granddaughter Julia's husband,
infra, § 64.
Asinius Epicadus was the son of a freedman of
Asinius Pollio. servi nomenculatoris. A nomenclator was
usually the name given to the slave attending the candidate
for office so amusingly described in Hor. Epist. 1. 6. 50-55,
with which passage one may compare Cic. pro Mur. 36. 77,
and Plut. Cat. Min. 8. In the present passage it is rather, as
Casaubon suggests, the attendant who acts as major domo, announces the guests, and looks after the details of the morning
salutatio. The form nomenculator for nomenclator is again used
in Calig. § 41 and Claud. § 34, and may be illustrated by
nuculeus for nucleus as in the Plautine proverb e nисе писиleum qui esse vult, frangit nucem, Curcul. 1. 1. 55. ex insulis.
Cf. § 65 note. -lixa: "a sutler." The name is probably
from lixo, to boil. Cf. Just. 38. 10. 2, who states that the majority of lixae are cooks; and see Val. Max. 2. 7. 2: lixas e castris submovit cibumque coctum venalem proponi vetuit.
20. per se
ipse. Introd. 16. dextrum genu. A. and
G. 240, c. et crus consauciatus. See § 80. consaucio
is a rare word. It occurs again in Nero, § 26.
21. partim ductu partim auspiciis suis. The actual leader in
the field is Dux, but the auspices were taken only in the name of
the Imperator. Under the Republic the Imperator always led
in person, and hence the campaign was under both his ductus
and auspicia. Under the empire, the leaders in the field were
only Duces acting for the perpetual Imperator, in whose names
the auspices were always taken. Albim. The modern Elbe.
-male quietas = inquietas. tantum afuit ut. A. and
G. 332, d. marum. Appositive genitive. A. and G. 214, f.
-sub lege = hac conditione. - Indos etiam et Scythas. So
Horace, Carm. Sec. 55: Iam Scythae responsa petunt superbi
Nuper et Indi; and cf. C. 4. 15. 23. signa militaria. Vell.
2. 91: Dum pacatur Occidens ab Oriente ac rege Parthorum signa
Romana quae Crasso oppresso Orodes quae Antonio pulso filius
eius Phraates ceperant, Augusto remissa sunt. Also Flor. 4. 12.
63-de regno concertantibus. "Phraates IV., to whom
Orodes I. had resigned his throne in B.C. 38 after some years of
tyranny, provoked his subjects to the point of rebellion. He was
expelled, and Tiridates, another member of the Arsacid house,
was put on the throne in his place. After a short time Phraates
was restored (Justinus adds by the intervention of the Scythians)
and Tiridates fled to seek the protection of Augustus." (Wickham.)
22. semel atque iterum = bis, and so infra, § 27 fin. The
two occasions mentioned were in the reign of Numa, and again
at the close of the first Punic War. Livy (1. 19), after mentioning these two occasions, adds: iterum quod nostrae aetati dii dederunt ut videremus post bellum Actiacum ab Imperatore Caesare
Augusto, pace terra marique parta. See also Vell. 2. 38; Dio
Cass. 51. 20. - Bis ovans. The derivation of ovo, and ovatio
from ovis, a sheep, because at an ovation the sacrifice offered
consisted of sheep, while oxen and bulls were offered at a triumph, is no longer generally held; but modern scholars accept
the explanation of Festus that the name is formed from the
same base as the verb ovare, to shout (the Greek aὔer), being
onomatopoetic in its origin, denoting the sound made by the
violent expulsion of breath, the Aryan AW, WA, to blow,
found in ἄημι, the Teutonic type WENDA (Fick, 3. 279; Curt.
1. 484), and the Eng. 'wind.' The Greek writers use the word
εὐαστής for ovatio, and compare the cry of the Bacchanals
εὐοῖ. With the derivation of ovatio from ovis we may, however, note a corresponding formation in vitulatio, vitulor, possibly from vitulus, a calf (Fest. and Varro), for which see Ennius,
Trag. Frag. 339 (Ribbeck): Is habet coronam vitulans victoria;
and Macrob. S. 3. 2. 14: certis sacrificiis fiat vitulatio (quoted
from Piso). continuo triduo omnes: i.e., each on one of three
consecutive days. On the occasion of this triumph he presented
each soldier with 1000 sesterces and each citizen with 800 sesterces.
He likewise settled 120,000 of his soldiers upon land, for which
the sum of 860,000,000 of sesterces ($34,400,000) was paid as
compensation to its former owners.
23. Lollianam. Vell. 2. 97, and Dio Cass. 54. 20. Vell. styles
Lollius a man pecuniae quam recte faciendi cupidior. He was
routed by the Germans, and the eagle of the fifth legion was
lost. Varianam. The famous defeat of the Romans under
Quintilius Varus in 9 A.D. in the Teutoburg wood by the German chief Arminius (Hermann). The Roman army was destroyed almost to a man, and Varus being severely wounded, fell
upon his own sword. His defeat was partially avenged by Germanicus, the adopted son of Tiberius, in 16 A.D., when he defeated the Germans at Minden. See Tac. Annal. 1. 55, and id.
Germ. 37, where the Roman loss is given as three legions.-
Cimbrico Marsicoque bello. And in the Second Punic War, as
appears from Livy, 22. 9: Qui (decemviri) inspectis fatalibus libris rettulerunt. .. Iovi ludos magnos
vovendos esse.
،،
24. gravate: "grudgingly." - subiecit hastae: "sold at
auction," the spear being the sign of an auction, as is the red
flag with us. Cf. Juv. 3 33: Et praebere caput domina venale
sub hasta.
contumacius parentem: obeying with too great
reluctance." dimisit = exauctoravit as below. citra commoda: "without reference to what was due them." decimatas. One man in every ten was selected by lot for punishment.
See Galba, § 12; Livy, 2. 59. II: cetera multitudo sorte decumus
quisque ad supplicium lecti; and Veget. de Re Militari, 1. 13.
Ila severe apud maiores disciplina servata est ut et doctores armorum duplicibus remunerarentur annonis et qui parum in illa
praelusione profecerant pro frumento hordeum cogerentur accipere.
-discinctosque: i.e., with the military garb (the sagum, etc.)
stripped off. So to denote grief at the burial of Augustus: primores equestris ordinis tunicati et discincti pedibusque nudis,
infra § 100. As a punishment it corresponds to our practice of
cutting out the stripes from the sleeve of a disgraced soldier.
-cum decempedis: to signify that they were unfit to be warriors, but worthy only to carry the implements of laborers.
25. "commilitones" appellabat: as Caesar had done. Cf.
Iul. § 67, note. — ambitiosius : "too fawning." - servos adhuc, etc. "And these men previously slaves and levied upon
very wealthy men and women and at once set free, he retained
under their original standard, neither enrolled with soldiers of
free birth nor armed in like manner with them." phaleras et
torques. Cf. Juv. 16. 60: Ut laeti phaleris omnes et torquibus
omnes. The phalerae were bosses of gold, silver, or bronze,
fastened to the belt by a copper clasp. The torques were chains
worn across the breast, and borrowed, according to Dr. Birch,
from the Gauls. Cf. O. Jahn, Die Lauersforter Phalerae, Bonn,
1860, and the note of Prof. Mayer on Juv. 1. c. - vallares =
castrenses. -Σπεύδε βραδέως. Gell. 10. II says of this: //-
lud Nigidianum rei atque verbi temperamentum Divus Augustus duobus Graecis verbis elegantissime exprimebat. Nam et dicere in sermonibus et scribere in epistulis solitum esse aiunt
σπεῦδε βραδέως, per quod monebat ut ad rem agendam simul
adhiberetur et industriae celeritas et diligentiae tarditas ex quibus
duobus contrariis fit 'maturitas.' The expression is likewise
found in the remains of the Στρατηγικά of the Macedonian
Polyaenus, dedicated to Antoninus and Varus. See the books
collected by E. Wölfflin (Leipzig, Teubner, 1860), 8. 24 4. The
Latin proverb festina lente is simply a translation of this Greek
saying. - ᾿Ασφαλής κ.τ.λ. A line from the Phoenissae of
Euripides (1. 612), where it is put into the mouth of Polynices.
Appian, 5. 84, attributes a similar sentiment to Augustus at the
time of his conflict with Sex. Pompey. captura: post-Aug.
word.
hostiliter ad urbem
ostendens gladii
troop of horse he
26. ante tempus. See § 10. - admotis
legionibus. So Dio Cass. 46. 42 and 43.
capulum. So Cornet Joyce, when with a
ordered Charles I. to leave Holmby House with him, and the
king had asked for his commission, pointed to his troopers,
with the words, "There is my commission." To which Charles
is said to have replied, "It is written in characters fair and legible."
C. et Lucium filios. His grandchildren in reality: being the sons of his daughter Julia by her marriage with Agrippa.
See §§ 64 and 65. - tirocinio: the ceremony of the assumption of the toga virilis, which was one of much importance, the
friends of the tiro following him in procession to the forum.
When the word tirocinium in this sense would otherwise be ambiguous, its meaning is made obvious by the addition of the
word fori. See Tib. § 54. suffecto alio: suffectus is the t. t.
for an official who is appointed to fill out another's term, for
which Suet. uses substitutus in Tib. § 4.
27. paganorum. In this passage paganus is opposed in
meaning to armatus, caligatus, or sagatus, and is equivalent to
togatus, i.e., a civilian. It is probably in this sense that we are
to explain the Eng. 'pagan,' following directly the language of
the Latin Fathers, who use paganus of any one who has not
“
put on the whole armor of God," and become a member of the
Church militant. Pliny, Epist. 10. 86. 2, says milites et pagani,
"soldiers and civilians." Tacitus (Hist. 3. 24) represents Antonius Primus as taunting his troops by saying, Vos nisi vincitis,
pagani, etc. See also Juv. 16. 32-34; Suet. Galb. § 19; and for
the usage of the Christian writers, Tertull. de Pall. 4 p. т. раganos in militaribus. The popularly accepted explanation of
the origin of our word 'pagan' makes it identical with that of
the native English term 'heathen,' receiving its present meaning from the undoubted fact that the dwellers in the rural districts (pagi) were the last to abandon the heathen rites and to
receive Christianity. This view of the word is held by
Schroeckh and by Skeat, and, of course, by all the popular
writers on English. But the probable truth of the matter is,
that it was first applied by the Christians to those who refused
the sacramentum, and hence were metaphorically pagani or togati. See Godefroy's Comment. on the Theod. Cod. VI. p.
250; Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, p. 1198, note: Mayor on
Juv. 16. 33. morum legumque regimen: i.e., the office of
praefectus morum, mentioned in Caes. § 76.
28. post oppressum statim Antonium: used for statim post
found in § 83: statim post civilia bella. rationarium: called
breviarium in § 101. - illam : i.e., rem publicam. It was probably at this time that Horace wrote his allegorical ode (1. 14), be
ginning, O navis referent in mare te novi Fluctus! plurium
arbitrio. Agrippa and Maecenas are said by Dio Cass. to have
differed on this question, Agrippa strongly advising Augustus to
lay aside the supreme power, and Maecenas as strongly urging
its retention. The advice of Agrippa is believed to have been
due to the undoubted fact that upon the retirement of Augustus
he would himself have been the most powerful man in the Republic. Dio (52. I sqq.) professes to give the arguments used
by the two men on the occasion mentioned.- eventu meliore :
“
by a more propitious fate," i.e., a chance more propitious to
the Roman people. Bonus Eventus was one of the recognized
Roman deities, also known as Deus Sanctus Eventus in the Inscriptions. That Suet. considers the rule of Augustus a wise and
beneficial one, may be seen from the expressions employed in
§§ 42, 51, 57. - Ita mihi salvam : ita = hac condicione.-latericiam: Plin. H. N. 35. 14, quoted by Casaubon, says that in
his time there were no walls of brick, because a law declared that
no wall should exceed a foot and a half in thickness, and a brick
wall of that thickness would not possess sufficient strength.
29. aedem Tonantis Iovis. See § 91, note. iudiciorum
multitudo. Augustus added to the three decuriae of judices a
fourth. See § 32. - duobus: i.e., the Forum Romanum, the
Forum par excellence during the Republic, and covering seven
jugera of land between the Palatine and Capitoline Hills; and
the Forum Julii, built by Julius Caesar de manubiis, as stated
by our author in Iul. § 26. praelucentem: "carrying a light
before him." Marcelli.
The son of his sister Octavia by C.
Marcellus, and the subject of the famous passage in the
Aeneid, 6. 860-836. aedes Herculis Musarum. One of the
epithets of Hercules in the Greek Inscriptions is the Doric
Μουσαγέτης (Corp. Inscrip. Graec. 5987. Cf. Lob. Phryn.
430), a title which belongs properly to Apollo. Macrobius
(Sat. 1. 12. 16) says: Fulvius Nobilior in Fastis quos in aede
Herculis Musarum posuit, etc., on which see Livy, 38. init.
Eumenius the Rhetorician, quoted by Torrentius, says: Aedem
Herculis Musarum in Circo Flaminio Fulvius ille Nobilior ex
pecunia censoria fecit, non id modo secutus quod ipse litteris et
summa poetae amicitia duceretur; sed quod in Graecia cum esset
imperator acceperat Herculem Musageten esse, id est comitem ducemque Musarum. Idemque primus signa novem, hoc est omnium Camenarum ex Ambraciensi oppido translata sub tutela for-
'tissimi numinis consecravit quia mutuis operis et praemiis iuvari
ornarique deberent, Musarum quies defensione Herculis, virtus
Herculis voce Musarum. The summa poetae amicitia is, of
course, the friendship between Fulvius and the poet Ennius, of
which Cicero speaks, in the oration for Archias, in words that
bear upon the connection of the Muses with Hercules : ille qui
cum Aetolis Ennio comite bellavit Fulvius non dubitavit Martis
manubias Musis consecrare. Qua re in qua urbe imperatores
prope armati poetarum nomen et Musarum delubra coluerunt, in
ea non debent togati iudices a Musarum honore et a poetarum salute abhorrere. In the edition of Suet. published at the Hague
in 1691, prepared by J. G. Graevius, a cut is given of a denarius bearing on the obverse the head of Q. Pomponius Musa
with his name, and on the reverse the figure of Hercules wearing
the lion's skin and having his traditional club beside him, but
playing the lyre. The figure is surrounded by the inscription:
HERCULES MVSARVM. Inferior MSS. read in the present
passage Herculis et Musarum, and so Plut. Quaest. Rom. 59:
κοινὸς ἦν βωμὸς ῾Ηρακλέους καὶ Μουσών. The same
author explains the connection between Hercules and the Muses
by a Latin legend quoted from Juba, which makes Hercules to
have taught Evander the use of letters. The whole subject is
very obscure, the most satisfactory yiew being that of Eumenius
cited above, which makes the relation between Hercules and the
Muses an external and accidental one. Cf. the Ausführliches
Lexikon der Griech. und Röm. Mythologie, Leipzig, 1888, s. v.
Hercules; and Die Musen in der Antiken Kunst, Berlin, Weidmann, 1887. The Marcius Philippus, mentioned in connection
with this temple, was the stepfather of Augustus, as stated in § 8.
30. regiones vicosque. There were 14 regiones: the number
of vici is not definitely known. excubias nocturnas vigilesque: The police force and the fire department at Rome were
practically one. The great defect in the old city government
had been the lack of any well-organized police. Augustus enrolled some 7000 vigiles, divided into seven cohortes, each cohors
having charge of two of the fourteen regiones or precincts. This
cohors or battalion was divided into seven companies, each under a captain (centurio)-the whole body of police being commanded by a chief of police or superintendent, known as the
praefectus vigilum. This officer had very large powers and
great responsibilities. His detectives were stationed at the
cloak-rooms of the thermae; he kept an eye upon all vagabonds,
slaves, and suspicious characters; and was generally responsible
for the maintenance of public order. Through his subordinates
he also kept strict watch over the kitchens of every house, saw that
the heating apparatus was safe and in proper order, and that
every basement had a proper supply of water for use in case of
fire. After a fire he conducted a strict investigation, and saw to
the punishment of those who by reason of negligence were to
blame. Juvenal (3. 7) speaks of fires as being of frequent occurrence, as might have been expected from the fact that the upper
stories of the houses were regularly of wood, as were the numerous outhouses. Martial (5.7) compares Rome to the Phoenix.
Pliny the Elder, in several passages, regards the frequent fires as a
proper punishment of luxury. Gellius (15. 1. 2) makes a friend
of the rhetorician Julianus remark on the fires of Rome which
lessen the profits derived from the renting of houses. Cf. also
Juv. 3. 197-8; and Seneca, Controv. 9. 11: tanta altitudo aedificorum est tantaeque viarum angustiae ut neque adversus ignem
praesidium nec ex ruinis ullam in partem effugium sit. Nero
gave orders that every householder should keep in the propatulum aedium the means of quenching fires (Tac. Ann. 15. 43).
Juvenal again (14. 303 sq.) speaks of the constant fear of fires on
the part of the rich. The subsidia reprimendis ignibus at Rome
were rather primitive, consisting of large buckets (hamae), ropes
(sparta), and a kind of fire-engine (sipho) mentioned by Pliny
(Epist. 10. 33. 2), who tells of a great fire at Nicomedia, and
says: Nullus usquam in publico sipho, nulla hama, nullum denique instrumentum ad incendia compescenda. The Digest, 33. 7.
12, § 18, mentions other appliances of the same sort. The Roman populace were not especially fond of their guardians, and
seem to have guyed them after the fashion of modern times,
giving them certain picturesque names corresponding with the
"Bobbies" of London, the "Cops" of New York, and the
"Roussins" of Paris, -e.g., siponarii or squirts," and sparteoli or "bucket-boys." On the police and fire-department of
ancient Rome, see Friedländer I. 27-9; Mayor on Juv. 14. 305;
and the very interesting chapter on the subject in Lanciani, pp.
“
206-230.-manubiali pecunia: money derived from the sale of
the praeda, and so simply the same as manubiae.
31. vivo Lepido. Seneca, de Clement. I, says: Ipsum Lepi.
dum ... per multos annos tulit ornamenta principis retinentem
et pontificatum maximum non nisi mortuo illo transferri in se
passus est; maluit enim illum honorem vocari quam spolium.
-dilectu habito. And so Tiberius, as stated by Dio Cass.-
negligentia conturbatum. Cf. Macrob. S. 1. 14, and note on
Iul. § 40. Salutis augurium. Dio Cassius (37. 24) explains
this augurium in the following words : τοῦτο δὲ μαντείας
τις τρόπος ἐστὶ, πίστιν τινὰ ἔχων εἰ ἐπιτρέπει σφίσιν ὁ Θεὸς ὑγίειαν τῷ δήμῳ αὐτῆσαι· ὡς οὐχ ὅσιον
οὐδὲ αἴτησιν αὐτῆς πρὶν συγχωρηθῆναι, γενέσθαι.
καὶ ἐτελεῖτο κατ᾿ ἔτος ἡ ἡμέρα ἐν ᾗ μηδὲν στρατόπεδον μήτε ἐπὶ πόλεμον ἐξῄει μήτ᾽ ἀντεπαρετάττετό
τις μήτε ἐμάχετο. - Ludos Saeculares. For which Horace
wrote the Carmen Saeculare, in the year 17 B.C. - Compitalicios: known as the Compitalia, because celebrated at the compita
or cross-roads. Gell. (10. 24. 3) says: more maiorum ferias concipere solet quae appellantur Compitalia, and Macrob. S. 1. 7. 34,
states that it was originally accompanied with human sacrifices:
idque aliquam diu observatum ut pro familiarium sospitate pueri
mactarentur, Maniae deae, matri Larum. It was held soon after
the Saturnalia each year, and on a day appointed by the praetor
(feriae conceptivae). -regiam. Pure Latin word for basilicam.
32. grassatorum. Tiberius also undertook the task of suppressing these criminals. Cf. Tib. § 37. grassaturas. Incorrectly marked by L. and S. as ἅπαξ λεγ. It occurs in Tib. § 37,
and in the Digest, 48. 19. 16, the latter passage, curiously enough,
being quoted even by L. and S. themselves.ergastula. The
work-houses for refractory slaves, attached to each large estate.
-collegia praeter antiqua dissolvit. As did Caesar, in Iul.
§ 42. sordibus. sordes is the dishevelled and unkempt condition of those in mourning, especially as here of those who are
rei. So tunica sordida, a mourning. garment. Cf. Cic. pro
Mur. 40. 86, sordibus confectus. So Cicero himself, when threatened with banishment, let his hair and beard grow, dressed himself in mourning, and ran about the Forum begging votes and
seeking popular sympathy.actui rerum: "to the trying of
cases." Here res = causa, as very often. - Novembri ac Decembri mense. Because in those months there were very few
dies fasti, on which the courts could be opened, owing to the
number of games and festivals that were then celebrated.
33. ne culleo insueretur. The punishment prescribed by the
Lex Pompeia de Parricidiis. The slayer of a father, mother,
grandfather, or grandmother, dolo malo, was first scourged and
then thrown into the sea, sewn up in a sack together with a cock,
a dog, a viper, and an ape. Cf. Nero, § 45. lege Cornelia.
The Lex Cornelia Testamentaria passed under Sulla, and punishing the crime of falsum, for which see Dict. of Antiq. s. v. Falsum. duas tabellas. One marked A (absolvo), whence A is
called the littera salutaris ; and the other marked C (condemno),
whence C is called the littera tristis.
34. ex integro. So de integro, ab integro, and denuo. On
the laws mentioned here intended to regulate the public morals,
cf. with Hase, Hor. C. 4. 5. 21; id. ib. 4. 15. 9; id. Carm.
Saec. 17; Gell. 2. 24.-- vacatione trienni: i.e., the release for
three years from any obligation to marry again. matrimoniorum crebra mutatione. Of course for the purpose of enjoying a
vacatio trienni. tempus coartavit. Making it two years instead of three. - divortiis modum imposuit. By declaring the
dowry forfeited by the one responsible for the divorce.
35. Senatorum numerum. See Iul. § 80. The additional
senators had been admitted by Antony. Orcinos. So called
because their elevation was due to Orcus. Plutarch (Ant. 15)
renders the term in Greek by the word Χαρωνῖται.
Διὸ τούτους ἅπαντας ἐπισκώπτοντες οἱ Ρωμαῖοι
῾Χαρωνίτας᾽ ἐκάλουν· ἐλεγχόμενοι γὰρ εἰς τοὺς τοῦ
νεκροῦ κατέφευγον ὑπομνηματισμούς. - vir virum legit. Each senator named one whom he deemed worthy of remaining in the senate, the result of this expression of opinion determining Augustus in his choice. Dio Cass. (52.42) says that fifty
senators voluntarily resigned. After the reorganization of the
senate, the number of senators remained about 600. - Cordus Cremutius. An inversion of the name. Seneca (Cons.
ad Marc. 1. 2) gives it in full as A. Cremutius Cordus. His
work on the fall of the Republic and the founding of the Empire
was condemned under Tiberius and burnt by order of the senate
(Tac. Ann. 4. 34), after which the author committed suicide by
starvation. He is the historicus mentioned by Suet. in Tib.
§ 61: obiectum et historico quod Brutum Cassiumque ultimos Romanorum dixisset.—epulandique publice ius: i.e., at the epulum Iovis and the banquets given in honor of the other gods,
presided over by the Epulones (Triumviri Epulones, later Septemviri Epulones) who formed one of the four great collegia at
Rome. Val. Max. says (2. 1. 2): feminae cum viris cubantibus sedentes cenitabant: quae consuetudo ex hominum convictu ad
divina penetravit; nam Iovis epulo ipse in lectulum, Iuno et Minerva in sellas, ad cenam invitantur. Quod genus severitatis
aetas nostra diligentius in Capitolio, quam in suis domibus servat:
videlicet quia magis ad rem pertinet dearum quam mulierum, disciplina contineri. Cf. also Livy, 5. 13. 5 sq. - legitimus senatus. There seems to have existed no regular rule as to what
constituted a quorum of the senate. Those present usually decided whether or not they were sufficiently numerous to proceed
with the business on hand. legitimus senatus is a regular session of the senate, held until the change made by Augustus, on
the Kalends, Nones, and Ides of every month; senatus indictus is
an extraordinary session, summoned by the curule magistrates or
by the tribunes. --Septembri Octobrive mense. Because this
was the season of the vintage. consilia: "committees."
36. acta senatus. See Iul. § 20, note. centumviralem
hastam. The spear was the sign of the magisterial power and
of the place where the court was held; hence the word hasta becomes a tech. term for the court itself. Cf. ius hastae in Tac.
Ann. 13. 28.
37. nova officia: "new offices." In this sense the word officium is post-Aug. Cf. Tib. § 42: novum officium instituit a
voluptatibus.—triumviratum legendi senatus. Formerly the
right of the censors by the Lex Ovinia. numerum praetorum.
Originally there was but one; after B.C. 246, two; under Sulla,
eight; under Julius Caesar, at first ten and ultimately sixteen.
Hence when our author says that Augustus increased the number
of praetors, he must mean as compared with the number in the
days of the Republic, for the number was in reality lessened to
twelve.
38. iustos triumphos. Evidently not iusti triumphi in the
strict legal sense of the word, for so many generals could not
possibly have satisfied the conditions of a iustus triumphus,
which were, (1) that the general should have held the office of
praetor, consul, or dictator; (2) that the victory should have
been won under his auspices and in his province; (3) that the
war should have been waged against a foreign enemy; (4) that
at least 5000 of the hostile force should have fallen in battle;
(5) that the Roman loss should have been comparatively small;
(6) that the boundaries of the Empire should by this victory have
been enlarged; and (7) that the victory should have terminated
the war. The triumphs mentioned in the text must therefore
have been granted by special favor, waiving many of the once
essential conditions. - intercapedinem. A tech. term used
again by Suet. in Vesp. § 10. - more travectionis. The inspection of the equites was formerly held by the censors. The
travectio equitum was properly, however, a procession held on
the Ides of July each year under the Republic, in which the
knights rode through the city to the Forum, crowned with
wreaths of olive and wearing all the decorations that they had
won in battle. See Livy, 9. 46. 15, and Dict. of Antiq. s. v.
Equites. gratiam fecit eis. "He excused those." See § 17:
Bononiensibus gratiam fecit.
39. notavit. A tech. term of the census, referring to the
nota censoria placed opposite the name of a person on the lists.
40. metu poenae theatralis. The punishment imposed upon
those who sat in the first fourteen rows without having the proper
fortune of 400,000 sesterces. The Lex Iulia Theatralis, however, had excused from punishment those who had ever had, or
whose parents had ever had, the equestrian census. Augustus,
therefore, simply revived this law. See Pliny, H. N. 33. 2.-
quaternûm mensum tesseras : "with corn-tickets for four
months." quaternum for quaternorum, as in three other passages in Latin. With tesseras sc. frumentarias, for which see
Nero, § II, tesserae frumentariae. In the next chapter we have
money-tickets mentioned; tesserae nummariae. Fabianis et
Scaptiensibus. To the tribus Scaptia belonged the Octavian
gens in which he was born; and to the tribus Fabia the Julian
gens into which he had passed by adoption per testamentum. —
a se: i.e., de suo, for which see § 45. From his own means,
--fisco. Originally a woven basket (cf. fascis, φάκελος, Skt.
paç, to bind); then a bag, purse (as in Claud. § 18, positis ante se
cum pecunia fiscis); then the public treasury, as in Cic. in Verr.
2. 3. 85; and finally the Emperor's privy purse, as here.-libertate libertate iusta. libertas is personal freedom; libertas
iusta implies political freedom. A slave who had during his servitude suffered punishment for any of the grosser offences came,
when manumitted, into the ranks of the dediticii, having no relation to the Roman people than that of a subject. Otherwise, he
might ultimately secure citizenship. pullatorum. Not necessarily, as L. and S. give it, " of the common people," but "of
men wearing the lacerna," as the context clearly shows. See Plin.
Epist. 7. 17. 9. The lacerna was commonly dark in color, and
often worn over the toga. In § 44 the word pullatorum possibly
refers to the common people, but even there it is doubtful. In
Claud. § 6, the lacerna is thrown off by the knights at the theatre
as a token of respect to the Emperor at his coming: quin et spectaculis advenienti assurgere et lacernas deponere (equester ordo).
solebat.-En, Romanos, etc. The verse is from Verg. Aen. I.
282, spoken by Jupiter to Venus.
circove. Roth with Ouden-
"Who could give securFrequentative of tango
dorp reads circave.
41. qui cavere in duplum possent.
ity to double the amount." - taxavit.
(tago), and a post-Aug. verb, except in the expression dumtaxat,
which is written in the Inscript. as two words.
42. destinaret. Inexact use of the imperfect, where a strict
regard for syntax requires the pluperfect destinasset because of its
dependence upon affirmavit. Others, taking the words quamvis
dare destinaret as those of the author and not of Augustus,
change the verb to the plup. indic. destinarat, which is very possibly correct, as quamvis in the later prose, especially in Tacitus, is used with the indicative. A. and G. 313, a and g.-
magna sterilitate. Paulus Orosius, the Spanish presbyter, writing
in the fifth century, attributes this scarcity of food to the divine
displeasure at the profanation of the Temple at Jerusalem. (Hist.
7. 3.) On the famine see Dio Cass. 55. 26. rationem deduceret:
"that he should take no less account of the farmers and tradespeople than of the populace." The expression rationem deduceret with
the genitive is so utterly without parallel as to lead most edd. to
fall back upon the easier reading rationem duceret, which was
adopted by Ernesti and Oudendorp. Yet the ordinary MS. reading is deduceret, and it seems to admit of a reasonable explanation if we only recall the fondness of Suetonius for using compounds in the sense of the uncompounded forms, -a peculiarity to which attention has already several times been called. Cf.
bis eundem praeponentes = ponentes, Iul. § 20; prospere decedentibus rebus = cedentibus as in § 91, cessit res prospere; in foro
depugnavit = pugnavit, Iul. § 39; praemia persolverentur = solverentur, Aug. § 15; tensas deduceret = duceret, Aug. § 43, and
Vespas. § 5. It is reasonable, then, to allow the MS. reading in
the present passage to stand, and to regard the compound as having the force of the simple verb. See Introd. 13, c.
،،
43. pluribus scaenis : on very many stages.”—per omnium linguarum histriones. Cf. Iul. § 39. - Munera. I
have supplied this word, the conjecture of Ernesti, to fill the
lacuna which Roth allows to remain after histriones. —Septis.
In the Campus Martius. - Caesarum nemus. Called after
Gaius and Lucius, the grandsons of Augustus. Troiae lusum.
See Iul. § 39, note. - Aesernini. Aeserninus Marcellus, mentioned by Tac. Ann. 3. 11. bipedali minor. Though Augustus himself was averse to such exhibitions. See infra, § 83.-
Parthorum obsides. Cf. supra, § 21. - tensas deduceret. The
tensae were elaborately decorated cars used to convey the statues of the gods to the pulvinaria at the time of the Circensian
games, escorted by the senators and pueri patrimi (the children
of parents married by the patrician ceremony of the confarreatio), who helped draw the tensa by laying hold of the
traces. If the driver thoughtlessly took the reins in his left
hand, the procession had to be commenced anew, and for one of
the patrimi to stumble was profanation.
،،
44. ordinavit: "reduced to order." -- nemo receperat :
no one had risen to receive." -- muliebre secus. Indeclinable
neuter form of sexus, usually found only in the accusative, as here.
So virile ac muliebre secus. Tac. Hist. 5. 13. Some edd. in the
present passage have muliebre sexus omne, regarding sexus as a
neut. like penus; still others read muliebrem sexum omnem.
45. cenaculis: "from the upper rooms." So Dio Cass. of
Tiberius, 57. 11. -ex pulvinari. Not, as Hase remarks, the
pulvinar of the gods on which they reposed at the Circensian
games; but the special pulvinar first decreed to Julius Caesar,
and mentioned by our author in Iul. § 76. So in Claud. § 4,
Augustus in a letter to Livia, speaking of Claudius, says: Spectare eum Circenses ex pulvinari non placet nobis. - suam vicem
fungerentur. See Introd. 13. fin. et saepe: et = sed. Introd.
17. corollaria. Originally known as struppi, according to
Pliny, H. N. 21. 2. --de suo. Cf. a se in § 40. - legitimos
atque ordinarios: "the ordinary professionals." - inter angustias vicorum. So angustiis flexurisque vicorum, Nero, § 38.
sine missione : "without quarter," i.e., ad mortem. coercitionem in histriones. The ancient ius virgarum in histriones
which empowered the praetor to scourge them; while magistrates generally had the right of imprisoning them at any time
at pleasure, thus putting actors on a par with prostitutes and
vagrants. In the reign of Tiberius the license of the histriones
grew so great that Tacitus says, actum apud patres dicebanturque
sententiae ut praetoribus ius virgarum in histriones esset (Ann. 1.
77). Tiberius, however, did not restore it, though he at one time
by a sudden exercise of power had all actors banished from Italy,
-pulsi tunc histriones Italia (id. ib. 4. 14). xysticorum : "the
athletes;" and so in Galba, 15. The xystus was a covered por.
tico used by the gymnasts in the winter. See infra, § 72, xystis
et nemoribus. Stephanionem togatarium. The same probably
as the Stephanio mentioned by Pliny (H. N. 7. 48) as having
been the first to dance on the stage in a comedy representing
Roman manners (hence togatarium), and as having lived to a
great old age, inasmuch as he danced at both celebrations of the
Ludi Saeculares, that under Augustus and again under Claudius,
the interval between them being 63 years. togatarius is a ἅπαξ
λεγ. if we allow the reading to stand. Others read togatarum
(sc. fabularum actorem), which seems difficult. - per trina
theatra: i.e., those of Pompey, Balbus, and Marcellus. pantomimum. A performer in a species of dramatic exhibition, in
which one actor sustained all the parts; hence the name. The
pantomime seems to have been introduced at the time of Augustus, and became extremely popular. The famous pantomimus,
Paris, mentioned by Juvenal, 6. 87; 7. 87; and by Mart. 11. 13.3,
was put to death for an intrigue with the empress Domitia. Cf.
Suet. Domit. §§ 3 and 10. - demonstrasset digito. Probably by
thrusting out the middle finger (digitus infamis), which was considered a gross insult among both the Greeks and Romans.
A similar gesture made by Caligula to his officer Chaerea led to
the conspiracy which ended in the Emperor's murder (Calig.
§56). So among the Greeks, as may be seen from Arrian, Epict.
3. 2. 11, cited by Mayor on Juv. 10. 53. It was also regarded by
the common people as a spell against the " evil eye," a superstition which still prevails in Italy. Prof. Gildersleeve on Pers. 2. 33
notes that the belief is embodied in coral amulets and breloques
made at Genoa. A somewhat similar gesture of insult was in
vogue in England some two centuries ago. It consisted in the
thrusting out of two fingers at the person whom it was desired
to insult, and was popularly called "making the horns at him."
An incident very similar to that in the present passage will be
found related of Tarlton, the actor, under the heading: "How
Tarlton and One in the Gallery fell out," given in Hazlitt's reprint of Tarlton's Jests (London, 1866), p. 205.
46. dignatione. A favorite word of Tac. and Suet. See L.
and S. s. h. v. sub die. on the day."
“
47. Latinitate vel civitate. Latinitas or the ius Latii was
the status of a person just below the grade of a civis. A Latinus could attain full citizenship either by gift of the Emperor
(beneficium principale), by becoming the father of children, by
six years' service among the vigiles, by building a house in Rome,
by building a grain-vessel and importing grain to Rome for six
years, or by owning and managing a mill for three years. See
Ulpian, Frag. tit. III. (Huschke), and Gaius, I. 28-34.
48. curae habuit. So Sall. Cat. 21: ut petitionem curae haberent. mente lapsis. Medical term found in Cels. 5. 26. 13.
Cf. with L. and S. lapsae mentis errorem, Val. Max. 5. 3. 2.
49. provinciatim. A word first found in this passage.
Calagurritanorum. From Hispania Tarraconensis. Cf. Iul.
§ 86: custodias Hispanorum. Germanorum. Dio Cass. 56.
23. quidquid militum. Cf. tantum hominum in Iul. § 39.
-sub manum : "handily." In Cicero, sub manu.
50. sphinge usus est. Pliny (H. N. 37. 1. 10), giving an account of celebrated signets, mentions this and the frog of Maecenas, concluding with the remark: Augustus postea ad evitanda
convicia sphingis, Alexandri Magni imagine signavit.-horarum...momenta, momenta, of course, is used to define horarum,
"the exact hour, and not merely of the day, but also the night."
51. civilitatisque eius. A rare word either in the sense of
πολιτική, or in its present meaning. Cf. Claud. § 35, iactator
civilitatis.
52. confiavit. In this sense mostly post-Aug., and often found
in Suet.exque iis. The enclitic que is usually added to prepositions only when the preposition is repeated, as in Claud. § 43,
de matrimonio deque adoptione. Some of the best MSS. in the
passage before us read ex quis, with which we may compare in
quis, § 36, init.
53. domini appellationem: "the title of lord." Orosius, 6.
22, implies that even in the time of Augustus, the word dominus
had something of a theological significance, and that Augustus
shrank from arrogating to himself a title that implied the assumption of divine sanctity. Domini appellationem ut homo
declinavit, he says. A supporter of this view might refer to
Tib. § 27, where Tiberius forbade any one to allude to the duties of his office as "sacred." So far as the term dominus is
concerned, however, the view of Orosius is that of one to whom
the usage of the Christian Church has given a false notion of the
classical meaning of the word. The real force of the Emperor's
objection to the title was of a political nature. The word dominus to a Roman, like δεσπότης to a Greek, meant specifically
a master in relation to his slaves; or, politically, a tyrant, one
who possesses arbitrary power, and hence equivalent to tyrannus, rex, words of hateful import. So domini legum, Cic. Rep.
1. 32; and Hic est enim dominus populi quem Graeci ‘tyrannum'
vocant, id. ib. 2. 26. So also in Sallust, Jug. 85: exercitum supplicio cogere id est DOMINUM non Imperatorem esse. Hence when
Tiberius declined it (Tib. § 27) he did so, as Suet. expressly
says, because he regarded it as used contumeliae causa, for at
that time he was posing as the single-minded unambitious public
servant. The whole policy of Augustus was to hold fast the
substance while studiously avoiding the symbols of royalty; and
hence a title like dominus would be peculiarly displeasing to
him. Later, when the imperial power had become hedged about
by precedent and tradition, the master of the State willingly accepted the title as his due. So Domitian was pleased when the
people saluted him and his consort in the amphitheatre with the
flattering cry of domino et dominae feliciter! (Domit. § 13.)
That Augustus was not troubled by superstitious reverence for
the gods, is evident from his blasphemous personation of Apollo,
described infra, § 70. The word dominus, besides retaining its
force as a term of great dignity, underwent a further development as a social title. It is the germ of modern titles of courtesy, passing into the Low Latin forms domnus, domna, donnus,
dominicella, and thence into the familiar dom, don, doña, dame
(originally used of men), madame (mea domna), demoiselle, mademoiselle, and the O. Eng. dan. Among the Romans, dominus
appears as a title of courtesy in Claud. § 21, where the Emperor,
to make his plebeian guests feel quite at ease, greets them respectfully as domini (' dominos' identidem appellans). So Martial to Caecilianus (6. 88):
Mane salutavi vero te nomine casu,
Nec dixi 'dominum Caeciliane 'meum':
that is, "I forgot to call you 'Mister." It was also a term of
affection, as in Ovid, Am. 3. 7. 11. Though Augustus declined
the title dominus, because of its unpleasant associations, his
courtiers were not long in finding others. Horace seems to be
the first to have coined the modern epithet, "Your Majesty," in
Epist. 2. 1. 258:
Carmen Maiestas recipit Tua;
and so the younger Pliny, who also employs the flattering term
Aeternitas Tua (Epist. 10. 83). Eutropius in his Preface addresses Valens as Tranquillitas Tua, "Your Serene Highness."
Symmachus in his Relationes, in addition to these titles, employs Clementia Tua, "Your Grace" (3. 6, ed. Meyer); Serenitas Tua (8. 3); and Perennitas Tua (13. 3). Cassiodorus (A.D.
575) has Magnitudo Tua, "Your Mightiness" (Var. 9. 13).
Celsitudo Tua is found several times in the Cod. Theod. In
the text domini is the appositive genitive, for which see A. and
G. 214, f.; Hk. 396. VI.--quasi de se ipso dictum. For the
readiness of the people to catch at allusions in the mimes and
apply them to topics of the day, see the expurgated portion of
§ 69, and Nero, § 39. - officii causa: "for the sake of ceremony." desideria: "petitions." - quasi elephanto stipem.
Quint. Inst. 6. 3. 59, and Macrob. S. 2. 4. 3. both quote this remark, giving, however, assem for stipem. nullo submonente :
"without a prompter," i.e., a nomenclator.grandi iam natu.
The reading of Oudendorp, grandior natu, gives a more natural
reading, but lacks MS. authority. sponsaliorum: a rare form
for the usual sponsalium, but found also in Seneca. - Gallum
Terrinium. Inverted name.
54. Antistius Labeo. The distinguished jurist, said by Tac.
(Ann. 3. 75) to have been incorrupta libertate et ob id fama celebratior. Gell. (13. 12), however, adds from Capito to his praise
of Labeo: Sed agitabat hominem libertas quaedam nimia atque vecors tamquam eorum D. Augusto iam principe et rem publicam
obtinente, ratum tamen pensumque nihil haberet nisi quod iussum sanctumque esse in Romanis antiquitatibus legisset.
Hor. Sat. 1. 3.82: Labeone insanior inter Sanos dicatur, which
passage, however, scholars are not agreed upon, Bentley reading
Labieno, and Schütz, Spohn, and Palmer retaining the MS. reading, but referring it to the C. Atinius Labeo mentioned in Livy,
Epit. 59. senatus lectione. Cf. § 35.
Cf.
56. contradixit. Not written as one word until our author's
time. Asprenas Nonius. Inverted name. Cf. § 43. Cassio Severo. Tac. Ann. 1. 72 says: primus Augustus cognitionem
de famosis libellis tractavit commotus Cassii Severi libidine
qua viros feminasque illustres procacibus scriptis diffamaverat.
Cf. also id. ib. 4. 21. Seneca has preserved specimens of his
writings and oratory. Numerous references will be found in
Teuffel, § 262. II. See also the anecdote in Suet. de Gramm.
§ 22.-superesset. deesset. For these technical terms see
the chapter of Gellius, 1. 22.
Murenae. Cf. § 19.
Castricium. Unknown.
57. Kal. Ian. strenam. New Year's gifts were made on the
Kalends of January, the recipients making presents in return
(strenarum commercium). The origin of the custom seems to
have been the desire to begin the year secundo omine. Tiberius prohibuit item strenarum commercium ne ultra Kal. Ian.
exerceretur. Consuerat quadruplam strenam et de manu reddere
Tib. § 34. Dio Cass. (57. 8) says that the same Emperor often
left the city on the first of January to avoid receiving the
strenae. Caligula revived the custom, and even edixit et streñas
ineunte anno se recepturum stetitque in vestibulo aedium Kal.
Ian. ad captandas stipes (Calig. § 42). Claudius again abolished
the practice (Dio Cass. 60. 6). Symmachus speaks of a later revival of it. The word strena is of Sabine origin, surviving in
the Mod. French étrenne. In its origin the term appears to have
been generally applied to an omen, and only later to a New
Year's gift. Plautus uses the expression bona strena in the sense
of omen secundum (Stich. v. 2. 24).
58. P. C. Patres Conscripti. The same letters also stand
for Patronus Civitatis, Patronus Coloniae, Potestate Censoria,
and a number of less common expressions.
59. Antonio Musae. Pliny (H. N. 19. 7. 128) speaks of Musa
as curing Augustus of a severe illness by prescribing lettuce,
which his former physician C. Aemilius had forbidden him to
eat. Cf. id. ib. 29. 5. Suet. again mentions him infra, §-81.
Horace was under his care: nam mihi Baias Musa supervacuas
Antonius et tamen illis Me facit invisum Epist. 1. 15. 3 sq.
praelato titulo. A scroll or label to denote the reason of the
sacrifice.super. Adverbial (if we read ludosque), as also
in the phrase satis superque, which is Ciceronian.
oppidatim :
A word apparently coined by Suetonius.
60. Caesareas. Towns of this name, or Sebaste = Augusta,
were founded in Mauritania, Samaria, Galatia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Pisidia, and Armenia.
62. simultate cum Fulvia. At the time of the Perusian war.
Cf. supra, § 14.
63. pueritiam egresso. The use of egredior in the active
governing an accus. as here, is mostly confined to the historical
and post-Aug. writers. tantum quod is a strengthened form of
tantum, classically used of proximity in time. Cf. infra § 98,
where it again occurs.
sibi genero cederet: sibi refers to Augustus, the object of the verb is Agrippam, and genero is the dative of the end for which: to give up Agrippa to him for a
son-in-law." Marcellarum. The two Marcellae, the daughters of Octavia by her former husband C. Marcellus.
،،
64. per assem et libram emptos. That is, by fictitious
sale.lanificio assuefaceret. Imitating the ancient usages
which made the spinning of wool the characteristic, typical
task of the mater familias. Cf. the line of the Epitaph (Corp.
Inscrip. Lat. 1007): domum servavit: lanam fecit. in diurnos
commentarios: " their diaries." referretur: i.e., referri posset.
65. laetum atque fidentem: laetum goes in thought with subole and fidentem with disciplina.neptem. Of this Julia,
Tacitus (Ann. 4. 71) notes: per idem tempus Iulia mortem obiit
quam neptem Augustus convictam adulterii damnaverat proieceratque in insulam Trimerum haud procul Apulis litoribus. Cf.
also id. ib. 3. 25. —amisit ambos. Cf. Vell. 2. 102. -per quaestorem recitato. A quaestor acted as the medium of communication between the Emperor and the Senate, reading the imperial
speech, much as the Lord Chancellor of England reads the Speech
from the Throne. Cf. Nero, § 15: De quibusdam rebus orationes
ad senatum missas, praeterito quaestoris officio, per consulem plerumque recitabat. Cf. also Tit. § 6. - notum senatui fecit: “he
notified the Senate." - Relegatae. A. and G.229; Hk. 385. II. 2.
-ex insula in continentem: i.e., from the island of Pandateria
to Regium. Cf. Tac. Ann. I. 53. -in insulam transportavit.
Planasia (Tac. Ann. 1. 3). - Αἴθ᾿ ὄφελον κ.τ.λ. Slightly altered
from Hom. Il. 3. 40. -vomicas. Censured as a coarse word
by Quint. Inst. 8. 6. 15. See the citations in L. and S. s. h. v.
66. afflicti: "ruined." - Salvidienum Rufum. A legatus
of Augustus during the civil war. Cf. Livy, Epit. 127: Q.
Salvidienum consilia nefaria contra Caesarem molitum iudicio suo protraxit (M. Antonius) isque damnatus mortem sibi
conscivit. Cf. also Vell. 2. 76; Dio Cass. 48. 13, 18, 33.—
Cornelium Gallum. The Gallus of Vergil's Tenth Eclogue.
Cf. also Eclog. 6. 64; Dio Cass. 53. 23. - provinciis suis:
i.e., Caesareis. ad necem compulso: "hounded to his death."
-Mytilenas. Cf. Tib. § 10. Other writers, quoted by BaumCrus., say that he was sent there by Augustus himself. Cf.
Dio Cass. 53. 32. - Murenae coniuratione. Cf. supra, § 19.
-honorem verborum. It was a point of honor to be mentioned in a friend's will, and a reproach to be passed over.
Cicero says (ad Att. 11. 2. I): ex multis meis et miserrimis curis
-est una levata si . ista hereditas fidem et famam meam tueri
potest. Antony seems to have reproached Cicero with receiving few bequests: Hereditatem mihi negasti venire Cic. Philipp.
2. 16. 40. See Mayor ad h. 1.
67. Patronus dominusque. So Iul. § 27, domino patronove.
He was dominus of his slaves, and patronus of his freedmen.-
Licinum, Perhaps better Licinium with many MSS. In Macrob.
S. 2. 4. 24, we find a Licinius mentioned as a freedman of Aug.
-per metum: equals ob metum or metu.
Thallo a manu.
See Iul. § 74, note.ei crura fregit. The ei is pleonastic.
-grassatos: "deporting themselves."
[68. This section and the part of § 69 omitted in the text
read as follows: Prima iuventa variorum dedecorum infamiam
subiit. Sextus Pompeius ut effeminatum insectatus est; M. Antonius adoptionem avunculi stupro meritum; item L. Marci
frater quasi pudicitiam, delibatam a Caesare, Aulo etiam Hirtio
in Hispania trecentis milibus nummum substraverit, solitusque
sit crura suburere nuce ardenti, quo mollior pilus surgeret. Sed
et populus quondam universus ludorum die et accepit in contumeliam eius et adsensu maximo conprobavit versum in scaena
pronuntiatum de gallo Matris deûm tympanizante: "Videsne,
ut cinaedus orbem digito temperat?"
69.
M. Antonius super festinatas Liviae nuptias obiecit
et 'feminam consularem e triclinio viro coram in cubiculum
abductam, rursus in convivium rubentibus auriculis incomptiore
capillo reductam; dimissam Scriboniam, quia liberius doluisset
nimiam potentiam pelicis; condiciones quaesitas per amicos, qui
matres familias et adultas aetate virgines denudarent atque perspicerent, tamquam Thoranio mangone vendente.' Scribit
etiam ad ipsum haec, familiariter adhuc necdum plane inimicus
aut hostis: "Quid te mutavit, quod reginam ineo? uxor mea
est.
Nunc coepi, an abhinc annos novem? Tu deinde solam
Drusillam inis? ita valeas, uti tu, hanc epistolam cum leges,
non inieris Tertullam aut Terentillam aut Rufillam aut Salviam
Titiseniam aut omnes. An refert, ubi et in qua arrigas?"
The Terentilla mentioned by Antony is probably Terentia, the
wife of Maecenas, who was exceedingly fond of her, and notoriously jealous. Dio Cass. (54. 19, and 55. 7) relates that Augustus had an intrigue with her.]
70. in fabulis fuit: "was a subject of gossip." - δωδεκάθεος. A colloquial use of the word. δωδεκάθεον is found in
Greek as the name of a medicine with twelve ingredients, and in
Pliny, H. N. 25. 4, as the name of a plant. The twelve gods are,
of course, those given by Ennius in the familiar couplet:
Iuno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Iovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
-choragum: i.e., Augustus. Mallia. Either a woman or,
possibly, the house where the dinner took place. Mallia possibly = Manlia. The whole epigram is very obscure. -Impia
dum, etc. "While Caesar blasphemously plays the part of Phoebus, and while he represents at dinner new adulteries of the
gods."-cenat. In this sense found only here. thronos.
Others read toros. Auxit cenae rumorem: "increased the talk
about the dinner." - Tortorem: the flayer of Marsyas. Xen.
Anab. 1. 2. 8. praecupidus. ἅπαξ λεγ. Cicero once uses
percupidus, ad Fam. 1. 7. 2. - Pater argentarius. See supra,
§§ 3 and 4.
71. murrinum calicem. murra was probably a red and white
agate, very highly valued by the Romans, and sometimes imitated by them in glass. See the very exhaustive citations given
by Mayor, on luv. 7. 133. There are some very fine specimens
of vasa murrina in the Townley collection at the British Museum.-[After conflaverit omnia the following sentence has
been omitted: Circa libidines haesit; postea quoque, ut ferunt,
ad vitiandas virgines promptior quae sibi undique etiam ab
uxore conquirerentur.] Aleae rumorem. Gambling at Rome
was forbidden by law, --vetita legibus alea, Hor. C. 3. 24. 58,
-and involved infamia; but the law does not appear to have
been enforced with any strictness. - praeterquam Decembri
mense: when much license was allowed because of the festivals.
Hase compares Mart. 4. 14. 7:
Dum blanda vagus alea December
Incertis sonat hinc et hinc fritillis.
-geronticos. Better written in Greek characters, γεροντικώς.-talis. The tali were rounded on two sides, and
marked only on the other four. On one side was a single
point, unio, the ace; on the opposite side, six points, senio, the
sice; on the two remaining sides respectively three and four
points, the ternio and quaternio. Four tali were used, and the
lowest throw (canis, canicula, iactus damnosus) was when they
were all the same. The highest throw of the tali (Venus, iactus
Venereus, basilicus) was when they all came out unlike. The tes
serae had all six sides marked, using the numerals I, II, III, IV,
V, VI. In playing with the tesserae, three were used. The
highest throw was three sixes; the lowest, three aces. See L.
and S. s. v. alea.
in medium conferebat: put into the pot."
See Iul. § 1, note.
Quinquatrus. There were two festivals
in honor of Minerva, known by this name, -the Quinquatrus
Maiores, March 19-23, and the Quinquatrus Minores, June 13.
-forumque aleatorium calfecimus: we made the dice-board
hot." forum is here from the nom. forus. si quas manus remisi: "for if I had insisted on having from each one the stakes
that I threw up." - gloriam efferet. A sentence very characteristic of the calculating nature of Augustus. He makes love
to learn his enemies' secrets (§ 69); he is generous because generosity is popular. Misi tibi. For the dative w. mitto see A.
and G. 225 b. 2; Hk. 384. II. 3. 1), note 2.
،،
72. Scalas Anularias. In the eighth district. Probably
named from the jewellers' shops. When the word Scalae is used
without the qualifying adjective, it refers always to the Scalae
Gemoniae, the famous steps leading down from the Aventine to
the Tiber, to which criminals were dragged by a hook. Cf. Tib.
§§ 53, 61; Vitell. § 17. -- aedibus modicis Hortensianis. See the
interesting chapter on the gradual evolution of the Palace of the
Caesars, in Lanciani. --laxitate: "its roominess." Cf. modicis
contentus aedibus nec multo laxiore suburbano, Tib. § 11. See also
Grammat. § 17. - locus in edito singularis: "a private place in
the upper part of the house." - Syracusas. Possibly referring
to the diaeta of Archimedes. Hase cites Nep. Dion. 9: cum se
Dion domi teneret atque in conclavi edito recubuisset, etc.
technophyon. So the MSS., or in Greek letters, τεχνύφυον, than
which τεχνύφιον is better and = τεχνύδριον, a diminutive
of τέχνη, but here more likely in the sense of "little workshop," "studio." - suburbanum: sc. praedium.in domo
Maecenatis. On the Esquiline, and very splendid. Herculis
templi. Hase cites Mart. 1. 12, Herculeas Tiburis arces. praetoria: "country-seats," and so in Tib. § 39; Calig. § 37-
Gigantum ossa et arma Heroum. Chiasmus.
73. altiusculis. As an adj., ἅπαξ λεγ.-forensia : "his
public dress." Cf. Calig. § 17.
74. nec umquam nisi recta : "and never unless at a regular
meal." cena recta is opposed to sportula, as in Mart. 8. 50. 10,
cited by the commentators: Promissa est nobis sportula: recta
data est. Cf. also sportulas publicas sustulit, revocata rectarum
cenarum consuetudo, Domit. § 7. - Mena. Menodorus, of
which Menas is the regular abbreviation, used ὑποκοριστικῶς,
as generally by the writers who mention him. So Hermas for
Hermodorus, and Demas for Demodorus. Menas was a most
efficient officer in the service of Sex. Pompey until he betrayed
him, for he had captured and held Sardinia (Dio Cass. 48. 45).
-ternis ferculis. So Pertinax, before he became Emperor,
confined himself to three courses (Capitol. Pertin. 12). Juvenal (1. 94) speaks of seven courses as a large number: quis fercula septem Secreto cenavit avus? Elagabalus is recorded as
having given a dinner of twenty-two courses, at which the company bathed after each course (Lamprid. Elag. 30). ferculum
is that in which the food was placed, and fitted the top of the
table. See Mayor ad Iuv. 1. c. acroamata: either “ readers"
or
"
singers."- triviales ludios : "strolling players," i.e.,
picked up at the trivia.aretalogos. ἀρεταλόγους = scurras, balatrones. Cf. Juv. 15. 16: bilem aut risum fortasse quibusdam Moverat ut mendax aretologus. Originally a sort of mendicant who professed to be a philosopher-Stoic or Cynic-of
the type ridiculed by Horace, Sat. 1. 3. 133-142, and Lucian,
Epig. 34. Cf. ἠθολόγος, Cic. de Orat. 2. 59; and βιολόγος,
Corp. Inscrip. Graec. 6750.
75. nonnumquam tantum ioculariter : "sometimes only in a
jesting way."- titulis obscuris et ambiguis. Apparently the
presents were in parcels, each with a titulus attached, bearing an
inscription which had a simple meaning until the contents of the
packet were seen, when another interpretation became possible.
The jest was probably in the nature of a more or less improper
double-entendre, as the names of all the articles mentioned in
the text are capable of such a use. At first sight the spongiae
seem innocent enough, but a comparison of the following passages will make the nature of the jest evident: Plaut. Rud. 4. 3.
69; Ter. Eun. 4. 7. 7; id. Menaech. 1. 1. 1; id. ib. 2. 2. 12; Plin.
H. N. 9. 45; Paul. ex Fest. p. 208 Müll. On rutabula cf. Naevius, Com. Frag. 126-7 (Ribbeck). -aversas tabularum picturas = aversas tabulas pictas.
76. Cibi. A. and G. 215; Hk. 396. V. The genitive of
quality is properly always coupled with an adj. - Secundarium
panem. Probably brown bread, which is never preferred by the
Southern peoples. Cf. the German proverb: "Schwarze Mädchen, weisses Brod." - pisciculos minutos. A double diminutive found in Ter. Andr. 2. 2. 32, where pisciculos minutos equals
the ἐπὶ τῶν λεπτῶν ἰχθυδίων, by which Athenaeus defines Menander's ἑψητοί. Cf. pisciculi parvi, Cic. de Nat. Deor.
2. 48.
manu pressum: “pot-cheese." - biferas: "that bear
twice a year." -acinis uvae duracinae. A difficult expression.
The best way to look at it is to make uvae the genitive of quality
denoting the genus, and translate: grapes of a hard sort."
Casaubon says: 'uva' et ‘βότρυς' totius fructus nomina sunt
،،
et 'uva' et ‘βότρυς' et 'racemus' ἀναλόγως dici solent de aliis quoque multis ut 'acinus' pro 'baccis, etc. -Sabbatis ieiunium: from the mistaken notion that the Sabbath was
a day of fasting with the Jews - bucceas. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον,
and probably a vulgar word. Mart. (6. 75. 3) has buccella.
“
77. Vini. Cf. Iul. § 53.-super cenam. See Introd. 16.
-se invitaret: indulged himself." - senos sextantes: "a
pint."-recens aridumve, etc.: "a fresh or dried cider-apple." Others read acidumve, but ve should in that case be
changed to que in order to make the expression reasonable,
Juvenal (Sat. 11. 75) speaks of dried apples at a dinner. -retectis pedibus: i.e., his feet shod, but uncovered (retectis) by the
stragula or bed-clothing. lecticulam lucubratoriam :
sofa." lucubratorius is a ἅπαξ λεγ.-resumebat: sc. somnum.matutina vigilia: ablative. -inter aliquas moras.
Suet. is fond of inter in this sense. Cf. inter iocum, Iul. § 4:
inter moras, Nero, § 49; inter cenam, Aug. § 71; Tib. § 53:
Galb. § 22; inter initia, Tib. §§ 26, 57; Claud. § 44; Domit.
§9; inter poenam, Tib. § 60. - condormiebat. A very rare
verb.
"a
79. lenocinii: "foppery." Cf. Cic. de Nat. Deor. 2. 58.
corporum lenocinia. vultum sumitteret. Sir Walter Scott
represents James I. of England as pleased with a similar bit of
flattery. See the chapter in The Fortunes of Nigel, where
James instructs Heriot, the goldsmith, how to present a petition
to Majesty in proper form. "And first, see you, sir,-ye shall
approach the presence of Majesty thus-shadowing your eyes
with your hand to testify that you are in the presence of the
Vicegerent of Heaven." (Ch. IV.)-subflavum. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον.-aquilum. Perhaps derived from aqua, and so in
Fest., meaning not exactly dark, but indefinite in color.
...
80. ad impetiginis formam: "with the appearance of a
rash."-crure sinistro. Cf. § 20. - habenarum atque harundinum: "bandages and splints." Roth reads harenarum, which
is also the reading of the MSS. If we retain it, we may suppose with Burmann that it refers to the application of hot sand,
for which we may cite Gell. 19. 8. 3, cum quispiam familiaris
eius (Frontonis) liberatum esse se aquae intercutis morbo diceret quod ' harenis calentibus' usus esset, etc. In the same passage Fronto objects to the use of harena in the plural, and
quotes Caesar's treatise de Analogia against it. harena and habena are easily confounded by the copyists, and Hase cites Manil. 5. 195 for a blunder which changes harenae to habenae.
That habena is a medical term appears from Cels. 8. 10, and
elsewhere. digitum salutarem. The index finger, so called
because used in greeting a friend. So digitus infamis, the middle finger (see § 45, note); digitus medicinalis, the fourth finger
(Macrob. 7. 13. 7); and digitus minimus, the little finger.
81. distillationibus: "abscesses." -praecordiorum inflatione: "an inflammation of the bowels."gravedine: "catarrh."
82. subucula: "an undershirt." - thorace laneo, etc.: "a
woollen chest-protector, and drawers and stockings."-petasatus. The petasus, petasunculus (πέτασος, πετάσιον) was
a hat of felt with a very slight crown and a broad circular brim,
sometimes tied under the chin. Dio Cass. (59.7) speaks of its
being worn in the theatres as a protection against the sun.-
Praeneste vel Tibur. The former is some twenty miles from
Rome; the latter, about sixteen. -egelida: "tepid." The e
is here privative as in exanimare, excusare, etc., like the Eng.
prefix un-.- albulisque. The sulphur springs. These were
near Tibur, and are mentioned by Martial (1. 13): Canaque sulfureis Albula fumat aquis. See the description of Nero's
Golden House in Ner. § 31, where there were balineae marinis
et albulis fluentes aquis.-ligneo solio : a wooden tub."
-duretam. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον.
،،
83. folliculumque. Also called follis in Plaut. Rud. 3. 4. 16:
ego te follem pugilatorium faciam. This, like our football, was
inflated with wind; the paganica (Mart. 7. 32. 7) was a ball
stuffed with feathers. See Becker's Gallus, Excursus II. Sc. 7.
-subsultim. ἅπαξ λεγόμενον. — segestria. Others read
segestri. The form segestria is found, however, in Varro, Ling.
Lat. 5, § 166 Müll. ocellatae. Possibly the "allies" of our
school-boys. pumilos. From πυγμή, πυγμαῖος, the other
Latin term being nani, for a discussion of which see Gell. 19.
13. 2.
84. Eloquentiam. Augusto prompta ac profluens quaeque
deceret principem eloquentia fuit (Tac. Ann. 13. 3). Cf. also
Gell. 10. 24. 2. -phonasco: "an elocutionist." In Nero, § 25,
"a singing-master."
85. prosa oratione. In Quint. Inst. 8. 6. 17, prosa occurs as
a substantive in the sense of "prose." - De Vita Sua. Plutarch, Ant. 22: ὡς δὲ αὐτὸς (Καῖσαρ) ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι γέγραφε. — summatim : superficially."-non succedenti stilo. In this sense stilus is very rare, occurring, however, again in Tib. § 70: affectatione . . . obscurabat stilum.
in spongeam. Comically; the original Ajax having fallen on
his sword. Macrob. Sat. 2. 4. 2, also repeats this jest.
86. praepositiones urbibus. So Graevius and Gronovius for
the ordinary reading verbis. Cacozelos et antiquarios : "imitators and antiquaries." -myrobrechis. μυροβρεχεῖς, and
better written in Greek letters (Thimm, p. 35). -per iocum
irridet. An amusing specimen of how Augustus was wont to
burlesque his minister's literary affectations, is given by Macrob.
Sat. 2. 4. 12: in epistola ad Maecenatem familiari, plura in iocos
effusa subtexuit : “Vale, mi ebenum Medulliae, ebur ex Etruria, lasar Arretinum, adamas Supernas, Tiberinum margaritum,
Cilniorum smaragde, iaspi Iguvinorum, berulle Porsennae, carbunculum Hadriae, ἵνα συντέμω πάντα μάλαγμα moecharum!"-M. quidem Antonium ut insanum. Cicero in his
third Philippic (9) says of Antony: Nonne satius est mutum essr
quam quod nemo intellegat dicere? Plutarch (Ant. 2) says of
him that he imitated the florid style of the Asiatic school.
Cimberne Annius. Inverted name. T. Annius Cimber, who became praetor by favor of Antony, is mentioned by Quint. Inst.
8. 3. 28 sq., as one who affected archaisms both in writing and
speaking. Veranius Flaccus. Possibly we should read Verrius Flaccus, the tutor of the children of Augustus, the author
of the famous work on language, and mentioned by Gellius,
(17. 6. 2) as having written a book on the obscurities of Cato's
style (De Obscuris Catonis). - ne moleste scribas : "not to
write in a labored style."
87. hoc Catone. That is, if we have not our ideal, let us be
satisfied with what we have. Valer. Max. 2. 10. 8, cited by
Hase, says that Cato's name had passed into a proverb for all
that was perfect.baceolum. Probably formed by Aug. out
of the Gk. βάκηλος = Gallus, a eunuch of Cybele (Luc. Eun. 8),
like βλάξ in the prov. θεός κολάζει τοὺς βλάκας, Xen.
Oec. 8. 16. From ✓ MAL, of μαλακός, Lat. mollis. The
✔MAL becomes ✓ MLA, and then / BLA. Cf. βλώσκω,
ἔμολον. - pro pullo pulleiaceum. Roth has in his text apud
pullum pulleiaceum joined to baceolum, while in the readings
given in his preface (p. xl), he says: ET PRO Pullo, Edd., UT
PULLUM PULLACEUM ego. I have restored the ordinary reading,
which has at least the merit of being intelligible. The word
pulleiaceus is found only here; pullus, of course, is the color. —
vacerrosum. Also ἅπαξ λεγόμενον, vacerra is a post, block.
Hence vacerrosus, "blockhead," "a poor stick." - betizare.
ἅπαξ λεγόμενον. From beta in the sense of that word in
Catull. 67. 21: languidior tenera beta, i.e., effeminate; and so
lachanizare, mentioned in the text, is from λάχανον, used
chiefly in the plural of vegetables. In Greek λαχανίζομαι has
only the primary meaning "to gather vegetables." genetivo
casu. In Latin, casus is used to translate the tech. term πτῶσις, used by the Gk. grammarians. genetivus is a mistranslation of the Gk. γενικός (ἡ γενικὴ πτῶσις), more properly,
however, representing the Gk. γεννητικός. See Κ. Ε. Α.
Schmidt, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Grammatik, Halle, 1859.
subicit circumducitque: "he places them below and draws a
mark around them."
88. Orthographia id est, etc. He defines the word, thus
showing that it was a comparatively new one to his readers. It
is used again, Gramm. § 19. per notas scribit. See Iul. § 55,
note, and id. § 56.
89. Apolloniam. Cf. § 8. Arei philosophi. Mentioned
by Dio Cass. 51. 16, and Plut. Ant. 80, as the teacher of Aug.-
De Prole Augenda. Q. Metellus censor censuit ut cogerentur omnes ducere uxores liberorum creandorum causa (Livy, Epit. 59).
A very characteristic sentence from this oration is quoted by
Gell. 1. 6. 2: 'Si sine uxore vivere possemus, Quirites, omni ea
molestia careremus; sed quoniam ita natura tradidit ut nec cum
illis satis commode, nec sine illis ullo modo vivi possit, saluti perpetuae potius quam brevi voluptati consulendum est.'-commissionibus: "in the literary contests."
90. talem accepimus: sc. eum fuisse. tonitrua et fulgura
expavescebat. So Tiberius tonitrua tamen praeter modum expavescebat (Tib. § 69), and protected himself against lightning by
wearing a laurel crown, because lightning was supposed never
to strike the laurel. Caligula hid under a bed during thunderstorms. (Calig. § 51.) - pellem vituli marini. Pliny (H.
N. 2. 55), speaking of lightning, says: Ex his quae terra gignuntur lauri fruticem non icit nec umquam V altius pedibus
descendit in terram. Ideo pavidi altiores specuus tutissimos putant aut tabernacula pellibus beluarum quas vitulos appellant
quoniam hoc solum animal ex marinis non percutiat.
ut praediximus: supra, § 29.
91. amici somnio monitus. Cf. Vell. 2. 70, and Val. Max. 1.
7. 1, where the name of the friend is given as Artorius, the physician of Augustus, so that some edd. in our passage read medici
for amici.per omne ver. So in § 81: initio veris praecordiorum inflatione tentabatur.tintinnabulis. This passage furnishes the only direct evidence that we have of the use of bells at
the doors of houses. Becker considers even the words here as
insufficient proof, but the meaning certainly seems plain enough
(see Becker, Gallus, Excursus I. Scene 2). Casaubon ad h. 1.
cites passages from Dio Cass. and Lucian, that seem to support
this obvious meaning.die certo emendicabat. To avert the
jealousy of the gods by an assumption of humility. So Caesar
and Claudius in the height of their power went up the steps of
the Capitol on their knees (Dio Cass. 43. 21-2, and 60. 23).
The slave in the chariot at a triumph was another device to
avert Nemesis. From the same motive, the abusive songs of
the soldiers on the same occasion were tolerated, as tending to
lessen the disposition of the conqueror to ύβρις. The curious
notion that divine jealousy is excited by human prosperity is
still strong among the Italian peasantry of the present day.
Mothers call their children by opprobrious and even indecent
names lest the Deity should think them too fond; and to praise
a child is to excite the apprehension of the parents. See Brouwer, Hist. de la Civilisation, 7. 102 sq.; and id. 8. 30 sq.
92. calceus perperam. So Pliny (H. N. 2. 7. 24): Divus
Augustus prodidit laevum sibi calceum praepostere inductum quo
die seditione militari prope adflictus est. compluvium. The
opening in the middle of the house, by which light was admitted from above. - Apud insulam Capreas. In earlier prose
writers, apud in the sense of in w. abl., is usually employed
only in certain formulaic phrases, such as apud forum, apud villam, etc. Tacitus and Suet. extend the use to names of islands
and towns. Cf. apud Hierosolyma, infra, § 93; apud Actium,
§ 96; apud Memphim, Tit. § 5; apud Judaeam, Vesp. § 5. —
Neapolitanorum. So Dio Cass 52. 43: τὴν Καπρίαν παρὰ
τῶν Νεαπολιτῶν ὧνπερ τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἦν, ἀντιδόσει
χώρας ἠλλάξατο. — δυσφημίαν nominis : i.e., the word
Nonis suggested non is, and hence seemed to forbid him to go.
For the importance attached by the Romans to names as a
means of forecasting the future, see Mervoyer, Études sur l'Association d'Idées, p. 376 sq. Livy (Bk. 28. 28) represents Scipio
as reproaching his soldiers with having followed a dux abominandi nominis, one Atrius Umber, which name, as De Quincey
cleverly remarks, was truly "a pleonasm of darkness." Cf. Auson. Epigr. 20:
Nam divinare est nomen componere quod sit
Fortunae, morum, vel necis iudicium;
and De Quincey's Modern Superstitions in vol. III of his works
in Black's edition, p. 303 sq.
93. contemptui habuit. So in Claud. § 15: ut contemptui
esset. Cf. curae habuit, supra, § 48.
94, non ab re fuerit. The subjunctive used, as often in Suet.
to affirm something politely (potential). A. and G. 311. b; Hk.
486. 1. Cf. § 7: Thurinum cognominatum... tradiderim.-Iulius Marathus. Cf. § 79. Asclepiadis Mendetis. Asclepias of
Mendes in Egypt. So Mendesicus, and Mendesius. —Theologumenon. Θεολογουμένων. - P. Nigidium. P. Nigidius Figulus
ranked second to Varro as a profound scholar. He was the author
of treatises on grammar, augury, natural science, astronomy, and
theology. Teuffel § 186. 1-8. -nutricula. The diminutive,
like mulierculas in Tib. § 6, seems to have no especial force
here. coaxare. A verb formed from the famous κοάξ. –
delibatum digitis: "received upon his fingers." -secundum
quietem: "during sleep." For this use of secundum, cf. Cic.
Div. 1. 24. 48, where the same expression occurs. -arborem
palmae. The appositive or epexegetical genitive as domini appellationem, in § 53; praenomen imperatoris, Tib. § 26; Gramm.
§ 4, appellatio grammaticorum. See Zumpt, 425. 3; A. and
G. 214. 2. f; Hk. 396. VI. castris locum capiens. Tech.
term as in Cic. de Nat. Deor. 2. 4. II: vitio sibi tabernaculum
captum fuisse. --- mathematici: "the astrologer." So we must
understand the word in Tib. §§ 36, 69.- thema: "his horoscope." Juvenal calls it genesis in 14. 248 (Hase).
95. puro sereno. An awkward use of sereno, coupled with
another adjective.
replicata intrinsecus ab ima fibra: "doubled inward at the lowest part." Cf. Cels. 4. II; iecur in quattuor fibras dividitur; and Cic. Div. 1. 10. 16: quid fissum in extis, quid fibra valeat, accipio ; and Pliny, H. N. 8. 28: si quidem
et pericula praemonent non fibris modo extisque sed [et] alia quadam significatione.
96. non litante. litare is a technical term of augury and =
καλλιερεῖν. Cf. Otho, § 8, and perlitare in Livy, 41. 14. —
rei divinae: see supra, § 1, note. Eutychus... Nicon: portending, of course, εὐτυχία and νίκη.
..
97. collegam suum. Cf. § 27 fin.aesar. Cf. Vaniçek
Griech.-Latein. Wörterbuch, I. p. 89.-quod inter omina
relatum est. Literature furnishes us with innumerable instances
of what the Hebrews picturesquely called Bath Qôl" the daughter of the voice," the "mysterious power of words to work their
own fulfilment as one of the laws of destiny" (Farrar). The
answer of the Pythian to Alexander the Great, & παῖ ἀνίκατος εἶ, is well known; and Suetonius records a careless speech
of Augustus to Galba, when the latter was a young boy, that
was held to be an omen: Constat Augustum puero adhuc salutanti se inter aequales, apprehensa buccula dixisse: Καὶ σὺ
τέκνον τῆς ἀρχῆς ἡμῶν παρατρώξῃ (Galba, § 4). See
also § 99. fin. - Astura. In Latium.
98. non alio datam: “for no other purpose." - rerumque
missilia. If this reading be permitted to stand, we may compare tabularum picturas in § 75. Some of the MSS. have rerum missilium, but in Nero, § 11, the same expression as that
in our text occurs again: sparsa et populo missilia omnium rerum. missilia is to be understood as a noun, denoting "thrown
presents," something as in the modern Carnival. - Thrasyllum.
Cf. Tib § 14: Thrasyllum quoque mathematicum quem ut sapientiae professorem contubernio admoverat. quinquennale
certamen. Cf. § 59. Nolae succubuit. So Velleius, Tacitus,
and Aurel. Victor. Eutropius, however (7.5), says: obiit in
oppido Campaniae Atella, and so Eusebius, cited by Hase.
99. clausulam: the source of the quotation is unknown. Cf.
Horace, A. P. 155: donec cantor‘Vos plaudite!' dicat; Cic.
de Senect. 19. 70; and Quint. Inst. 6. 1. 52. — εὐθανασίαν.
Cicero uses the word ad Att. 16. 7. 3.
100. XIIII Kal. Septemb. Aug. 19. A. D. 14. - Bovillas
usque = usque ad Bovillas. Senatus. Nihil primo Senatus
die agi passus nisi de supremis Augusti, Tac. Ann. 1. 8.-sacerdotes summorum collegiorum. The four great collegia were
the Pontifical, the Augural, the Quindecimviral, and that of the
Septemviri Epulones. - vir praetorius Dio Cass. (56.46)
gives his name as Numerius Atticus, and says that he was bribed.
by Livia to make this statement, similar to that which had been
made of Romulus after death. Dio hints that Livia poisoned
her husband, fearing lest he should restore Agrippa to favor, and
thus endanger the prospects of Tiberius (id. ib. 30).
101. virgines Vestales. So Caesar's will had been intrusted
to the Virgo Vestalis Maxima, Iul. § 83. liberosque eius tres:
i.e., Nero, Drusus, C. Caesar. annuum diem: "the period of
a year." indicem rerum a se gestarum. It was engraved
upon a tablet of bronze, and placed before his mausoleum
erected in the Campus Martius, The contents of the tablet are
known to us from the Monumentum Ancyranum, an inscription
found on the inside of the antae of a temple at Ancyra in Galatia, and an exact copy of the original tablet. It begins with the
heading: RERvM GESTARVM DIVI AVGVSTI QVIBVS orbem terRARVM IMPERIO POPVLI ROMANI SVRIECIT ET INPENSARVM
QVAS IN REMPUBLICAM POPVLVMQVE ROMANVM FECIT INCISARVM
IN DVABVS AHENEIS PILIS QUAE SVNT ROMAE POSITAE EXEMPLAR SVBIECTVM.
The first complete copy of this very important inscription was
made by the French archæologist Perrot, who was sent into
Asia Minor by Napoleon III. Perrot's work, entitled Exploration Archéologique de la Galatie, de la Bithynie, etc., is one of
much interest. The German scholar, Humann, in 1882, took
plaster-casts of the Latin inscription, and of the Greek version
which was cut on the outer wall of the Augusteum. From Humann's casts, Theodor Mommsen made an edition of the inscription with a fac-simile of it in eleven plates, and a commentary (Berlin, 1883).
The mausoleum of Augustus was a pyramidal tower, 328 feet
in height and of the same breadth at the base. It was covered
with white marble and divided into three stories by receding
steps, each story being planted with cypress trees. At the top
was a small temple, surmounted by a statue of Augustus, and
containing an urn for the reception of the imperial ashes. In
the Middle Ages the mausoleum was used as a fortress, as was
also the Palace of the Caesars. The remains of the mausoleum
are still to be seen on the Via de' Pontefici.
END OF THE COMMENTARY.
