The ancestors of Otho were natives of the town of
Ferentium, of a family old and illustrious, and descended from
the princes of Etruria. His grandfather Marcus Salvius Otho,
whose father was a Roman knight, but whose mother was of
mean extraction, and perhaps not even free-born, was made a
senator through the favour of Livia Augusta, in whose house
he had been reared, but he did not advance beyond the rank of
praetor.
His father Lucius Otho, of noble lineage on his mother's side,
and with many powerful connexions, was so beloved by the
emperor Tiberius, and so like to him in features, that many
people believed that he was begotten by him. He displayed
the utmost severity while holding the city magistracies, the
proconsulship of Africa, and some extraordinary commands.
He even had the courage to punish with death some soldiers in
Illyricum, because in the revolt of Camillus they, repenting of
their complicity, had killed their officers as fomentors of rebellion against Claudius; and he had this punishment inflicted
in his own presence and before his own headquarters, although
he knew that they had been promoted to higher rank by Claudius
for that very deed. By this action, though he enhanced his
reputation, he diminished his favour at court; yet he speedily
regained it by exposing the treachery of a Roman knight, who
was betrayed by his own slaves and found to be plotting the
death of Claudius. For the senate honoured him with the
rarest of all distinctions, the erection of his statue in the Palace;
and Claudius admitted him to the patrician order, commending
him in the most flattering terms, and adding these words: "A
man whom I would not even wish my own children to excel."
By Albia Terentia, a lady of a noble house, he had two sons,
Lucius Titianus, and a younger called Marcus, who bore the
same surname as himself. He also had a daughter by her, whom
he betrothed to Drusus, son of Germanicus, when she was hardly
yet of marriageable age.
The emperor Otho was born on the fourth day before the
Kalends of May, in the consulship of Camillus Arruntius and
Domitius Ahenobarbus. From his earliest youth he was so
prodigal and wild that he was often severely scourged by his
father; and they say that he was in the habit of roaming the
streets at night, seizing any feeble or drunken person he met,
laying him on an outstretched cloak, and tossing him in the
air. After his father's death, to pay court more effectually
to an influential freedwoman of the Palace, he even made a
pretence of love for her, though she was old and almost decrepit.
By her means he worked himself into the good graces of Nero,
and easily held the foremost place among his friends by the
conformity of his character with that of the emperor, and,
as some relate, by the practice of mutual unchastity. So
powerful was his influence, that in consideration of a huge sum
agreed upon he did not hesitate to bring into the senate-house
to return thanks a man of consular rank who had been condemned for extortion, even though he had not yet secured for
him a full restoration.
He was now the confidant of all the designs and secrets
of the emperor, and on the day which Nero had appointed for
the murder of his mother, in order to avert all suspicion, he
entertained them both at a banquet graced by every refinement
of geniality. In like manner he received, under the semblance
of marriage, Poppaea Sabina, at that time still a mistress of
Nero, who had taken her from her husband and entrusted her
for the time being to Otho. But he, not satisfied with having
seduced her, became so passionately enamoured that he could
not brook with patience even Nero as a rival. At least it is
generally believed that not only did he refuse to admit the
messengers sent to fetch her, but that once he even shut out
Nero himself, as he stood before the door vainly mingling
entreaties with threats, and claiming back what he had lodged
in trust. Therefore this marriage was dissolved and he was
sent away, ostensibly as governor, to Lusitania. Nero contented himself with this, lest a harsher punishment might make
public the whole farce, which, all the same, gained notoriety
through this couplet:
"Do you ask why the so-called preferment of Otho is really
an exile?
With his own wedded wife he had begun an amour."
Holding the rank of ex-quaestor, he administered the province
for ten years with rare moderation and disinterestedness.
When at length an opportunity for revenge was afforded
him, he was the first to join with Galba in his attempts. At
the same juncture he himself conceived a hope of empire, a
G
great hope by reason of the state of the times, but a much
greater hope by reason of the assurance given him by Seleucus,
the astrologer, who in earlier days had guaranteed that Otho
would outlive Nero, and now of his own accord and unexpectedly had come with a further promise that he should become
emperor, and that in a short time. He therefore neglected no
method of showing attention or seeking popularity in his
dealings with anyone. As often as he entertained the emperor
to dinner, he presented to each of the guard on duty a piece
of gold, and was no less careful to make the soldiers beholden
to him, one one way, another another. When one of them was
at law with his neighbour about a strip of boundary, and he
was chosen arbiter, he bought up the whole piece of land and
conveyed it to him as a possession; so that now there was
scarcely one who did not both think and openly assert that Otho
alone was worthy to succeed to the empire.
He had hopes of being adopted by Galba, and looked for
this from day to day. But when he was disappointed in his
hopes by Piso's being preferred to him, he turned to violence,
goaded on not merely by resentment, but also by the greatness
of his debts. For he stated without any concealment that he
could not keep upon his feet unless he became emperor, and
that it mattered not whether he fell by the hands of his enemies
in battle or of his creditors in the Forum. Some few days
earlier he had squeezed a million sesterces out of one of the
emperor's slaves for obtaining him a stewardship, and this sum
formed the mainstay of so great an enterprise. In the first
instance the project was confided to five of the bodyguard, then
to ten others, each of the five bringing in two. To every one
of them ten thousand sesterces were paid down, and a further
fifty thousand promised. By these soldiers others were drawn
in, but not very many, from a confident assurance that numbers
would join them when the hour of action came.
His intention had been to seize the camp immediately
after the adoption (of Piso), and to fall upon Galba as he was
dining in the Palace, but he was restrained by consideration for
the cohort then on guard, lest he should bring too heavy odium
upon it, since this same cohort had been on duty when Gaius
was slain and when Nero was deserted. The intervening period
also was rendered idle by unfavourable omens and the disapproval of Seleucus.
G2
Accordingly, when the day was fixed, having warned his
accomplices to await him in the Forum, near the temple of
Saturn, at the gilded mile-post, he went in the morning to pay
his respects to Galba; and being received with the customary
kiss, was present also as he sacrificed, and heard the predictions
of the soothsayer. After which a freedman of his brought him
word that the architects were come, which was the preconcerted
signal, and he went off as if to view a house that was for sale,
and rushed away through the back part of the Palace to the
appointed place. Some say that he feigned a fever and charged
those about him to give this as an excuse, if he were missed.
Then hastily stowing himself in a woman's closed sedan he set
out for the camp, but his bearers grew weary and he alighted
and began to run. His shoe became unfastened and he stopped;
so finally without further delay his comrades raised him on their
shoulders and he was hailed as emperor by his attendant train,
and amid auspicious acclamations and drawn swords he arrived
at the headquarters in the camp, while all who met him on the
way attached themselves to him, as though they were privy and
party to the plot. Then, after despatching emissaries to slay
Galba and Piso, he made no further profession to the assembled
soldiers, by way of winning their affections through promises,
than that he would have for himself that and that only-which
they thought fit to leave him.
After this, when the day was already waning, he entered
the senate, and having laid before them a brief account of his
conduct, alleging that he had been carried away perforce from
the street and compelled to undertake the government, which he
would administer in accordance with the general will of all, he
proceeded to the Palace. Over and above the other blandishments of those who heaped congratulations and flatteries upon
him, he was hailed as Nero by the mob, and showed no sign of
disapproval; nay rather, as some have related, even in his
patents and in his first letters to some governors of provinces
he added the surname of Nero. Undoubtedly he allowed all
Nero's images and statues to be set up anew, and he restored
his procurators and freedmen to their former posts; while the
earliest warrant signed by him as emperor was for the outlay of
fifty million sesterces to complete the Golden House.
It is said that on that very night, being terrified in his sleep,
he uttered the most awful groans, and when his servants ran
crowding in, he was found lying on the floor before his bed;
also that he essayed by every kind of atoning sacrifice to appease
the ghost of Galba, by whom he had seen himself in his sleep
thrown down and thrust forth; that furthermore on the morrow,
as he was taking the auspices, a violent storm arose and he fell
heavily to the ground, whereupon he muttered to himself from
time to time :
"With long pipes what have I to do?”
Now about the same time the armies in Germany had
sworn allegiance to Vitellius. When Otho learned this, he proposed to the senate to send deputies to acquaint them that an
emperor had been already chosen, and to counsel peace and
unity; nevertheless by messengers and letters he made offer to
Vitellius to share with him the empire and to take his daughter
in marriage. But when it became manifest that war was
inevitable, and already the generals and the forces which
Vitellius had sent forward were approaching, he received from
the praetorians a proof of their attachment and fidelity which
almost involved the destruction of the most honourable order
of senators. It had been decided that some arms should be
transferred by the marines and sent back by ship. When these
were being handed out in the camp towards nightfall, some suspected treachery and raised a riot; and of a sudden all of them,
without any regular leader, ran to the Palace, clamouring for
the lives of the senate; and having repulsed those of the
tribunes who essayed to stop them, and slain some, they forced
their way, all bloodstained as they were, right into the
banqueting hall, asking where the emperor was; and they never
rested till they had seen him.
He entered on his expedition with vigour and indeed with
undue haste, without any regard even for portents, and though
the sacred shields had been taken out and not yet restored,
which from the earliest ages has been held to be a most unlucky
omen; on that very day, too, when the votaries of the Mother
of the Gods begin their wailings and lamentations; moreover,
with auspices of the most unfavourable kind. For in a victim
slain to father Dis he discovered lucky signs, whereas in such
a sacrifice boding entrails are the better; and at his first setting
out from the city he was stayed by the floodings of the Tiber,
while at the twentieth milestone he likewise found the highway
blocked by fallen houses.
With like rashness, though no one had any doubt that
the proper course for him was to protract the war, since the
enemy were sorely pressed by hunger and by their cramped
position, he resolved to fight a decisive battle as quickly as
might be; whether it was that he was unable to bear the strain
of further anxiety and hoped to settle the main issue before the
arrival of Vitellius, or that he was incapable of resisting the
fiery zeal of his troops, who clamoured for the fight. He himself was not present at any of the fighting, but stayed behind at
Brixellum.
In three encounters, though minor ones, in the district of
the Alps, near Placentia, and "At Castor's," as the place is
called, he was victorious. But in the last and greatest battle
at Betriacum he was overcome by treachery. For when hope
of a conference was held out, and his soldiers were led forth as
if to hear the terms of peace, all unexpectedly and amid the
exchange of greetings with their foes, they were forced to fight.
And straightway Otho formed a resolve to die, more, as many
think and not without reason, from shame at the thought of
persisting in a struggle for sovereignty at such hazard to the
State and human life, than from any despair and distrust of
his forces; for he still had in reserve quite unimpaired the
troops he had kept with him for a second trial of fortune, and
others were coming up from Dalmatia, Pannonia, and Moesia;
while even his defeated troops were not so dejected as not to
be ready, unbidden and even unsupported, to face any risk to
avenge themselves for their disgrace.
My father Suetonius Laetus took part in this war as a
tribune of equestrian rank in the Thirteenth legion. He in
later days used frequently to relate that Otho, even when still a
private citizen, had such a loathing of civil warfare, that once,
when some one at table mentioned the end of Cassius and
Brutus, he shuddered with dismay; that he never would have
opposed Galba, had he not felt sure that the matter could
be arranged without a war; furthermore, that he was then
encouraged to despise life by the example of a common soldier,
who, when he brought news of the army's overthrow, and could
find credence with none, but was charged now with lying and
now with cowardice as a runaway from the fight, fell upon his
sword at his emperor's feet. My father used to say that at
this sight Otho cried out that he would no longer thrust into
danger such brave fellows who had deserved so well of him.
Therefore, having exhorted his brother, his brother's son,
and each of his friends to provide for their own safety as best
they could, he embraced and kissed them and sent them all
away; then, seeking a place apart, he hastily wrote two notes,
one of consolation to his sister, and also one to Messalina, Nero's
widow, whom he had purposed to wed, commending to her his
relics and his memory.
After that, whatever letters he had
with him, he burnt them all, that they might not cause peril
or hurt to anyone by falling into the victor's hands. He also
distributed among his servants the money which he had with
him.
Being now thus prepared, and fully bent upon death,
he learned from an uproar which arose while he still tarried
that those who were beginning to depart and leave the camp
were being seized and detained as deserters. "Let us add,"
said he, "this one night also to our life" (such were his words
and so many in number), and he forbade the offering of violence
to any; then, leaving his chamber door open till far into the
night, he permitted all that would to have access to him. After
that, quenching his thirst with a draught of cold water, he
caught up two daggers, and having tried the points of both, he
laid one of them under his pillow, and closing his chamber door,
he slept right soundly. Wakening at last about dawn, he
stabbed himself with a single thrust under his left breast; and
when his servants burst in at the sound of his first groan, he,
at one moment hiding, at another uncovering his wound,
breathed forth his life, and hastily (for so he had enjoined) he
was given funeral-rites in the thirty-eighth year of his age, and
on the ninety-fifth day of his reign.
The body and bearing of Otho in no way corresponded
to this greatness of spirit. He is said to have been small of
stature, with misshapen feet and crooked legs, but almost
effeminately nice in the care of his person. The hair of his
body was plucked out, and by reason of the thinness of his
locks he wore a wig so closely fashioned and fitted to his head,
that no one could distinguish it. Nay more, they say that he
used to shave his face each day and to smear it with soaked
bread, beginning this practice when the first down had shown,
that he might never have a beard. They say likewise that he
celebrated the rites of Isis publicly in the linen vestment of
that cult. It was such habits as these, I fancy, that caused a
death so little in keeping with his life to excite the greater
marvel. Many of the soldiers who were present, when with
streaming eyes they had kissed his hands and feet as he lay
dead, and had lauded him as the bravest of men and a peerless
emperor, immediately upon that very spot close by his pyre sought
death by their own hands. Many too of those who were absent,
when they heard the tidings, in the agony of their grief rushed
one upon another and perished by the sword. In fine, the
generality of mankind who had cursed him most bitterly while
he lived extolled him most highly after he was dead; so that it
was even commonly affirmed that Galba had been cut off by him,
not so much for the sake of reigning, as of restoring the republic
and freedom.
