CHAPTER 1.
Progenies Caesarum in Nerone defecit: Nero left no son of his own,
nor had he adopted a son who might have been chosen as his successor.
Dio Cassius (ap. Xiphilinum), lxiii 29, describes him as ἔσχατος τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ
Αἰνείου καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Αὐγούστου γεγονότων and in lxii 18 mentions a
"Sibylline" verse quoted by the angry populace against Nero after the
great fire at Rome in his reign: ἔσχατος Αἰνεαδῶν μητροκτόνος ἡγεμονεύσει
(imitated in Auson. Caes. vi, Aeneadum generis qui sextus et ultimus
heres, polluit et clausit Iulia sacra Nero). Cf. also Eutrop. vii 15, in eo
omnis Augusti familia consumpta est: Tac. Ann. xiv 17, (Nero) qui unus
superesset e familia summum ad fastigium genita. In Tac. Hist. i 16.
Galba says in his speech when adopting Piso: sub Tiberio et Gaio et Claudio
unius familiae quasi hereditas fuimus: loco libertatis erit quod eligi
coepimus, et finita Iuliorum Claudiorumque domo optimum quemque adoptio
inveniet. The house of the Julian Caesars came to an end on the death of
the emperor Gaius (Caligula), son of Germanicus. When his successor
Claudius took the name "Caesar," it was no longer a family name but an
imperial title, as Claudius, son of Drusus, had not been transferred into the
Julian gens like his uncle Tiberius and his brother Germanicus. See Bury
(Student's Roman Empire c. 15, 1), who points out that the Julian and
Claudian families had been so closely connected since the marriage of
Augustus and Livia that they were almost regarded as a single house.
Liviae: Livia Drusilla, daughter of Livius Drusus Claudianus, was
first married to Tiberius Claudius Nero to whom she bore a son Tiberius,
afterwards emperor. Octavian became enamoured of her beauty, and in
38 B.C. her husband was forced to surrender her to the triumvir, though she
was with child (Drusus) at the time. Suetonius says that Augustus
esteemed and loved her faithfully to the end: dilexit et probavit unice ac
perseveranter (Aug. 62, 2). She outlived Augustus and died in 29 A.D.
Veientanum: sc. praedium, an estate about nine miles from Rome at
Veii a town in Etruria on the site of the mod. Isola Farnese.
..
aquila gallinam demisit: the same story is told by Pliny, N.H.
xv 136: Sunt et circa divom Augustum eventa eius digna memoratu;
namque Liviae Drusillae quae postea Augusta matrimoni nomen accepit,
cum pacta esset illa Caesari, gallinam conspicui candoris sedenti aquila ex
alto abiecit in gremium inlaesam, intrepideque miranti accessit miraculum,
quoniam tenentem rostro laureum ramum onustum suis bacis; conservari
alitem et subolem iussere haruspices ramumque eum seri ac rite custodiri.
Quod factum est in villa Caesarum fluvio Tiberi imposita iuxta nonum
lapidem Flaminia via, quae ob id vocatur ad Gallinas, mireque silva provenit; ex ea triumphans postea Caesar laurum in manu tenuit coronamque
capite gessit ac deinde Caesares cuncti; traditusque mos est ramos quos
tenuerunt serendi et durant silvae nominibus suis discretae, fortassis ideo
mutatis triumphalibus. This story is regarded by some as the origin of
the expression gallinae filius albae (Juv. xiii 141), which others explain by
the statement of Columella (viii 2, 7) that white hens are delicate and unprolific.
pangi: Fest., p. 213 Müll., pangere, figere; unde plantae pangi dicuntur,
cum in terram demittantur. This verb (connected with πήγνυμι) is sometimes used with the acc. of the place and the abl. of the plant, e.g. Colum.
xi 2, 18, vitiaria malleolis pangere; Prop. iii 17, 15, ipse seram vites
pangamque ex ordine colles.
placuisset: Pliny (l.c.) says that it was the haruspices who ordered this
to be done. Dio (xlviii 52) mentions that Livia herself took care of the
hen and planted the laurel: τήν τε ὄρνιθα ἐν ἐπιμελείᾳ ἦγε (ἡ Λιουία) καὶ τὴν
δάφνην ἐφύτευσε.
hodieque: = hodie quoque (hodie etiam, usque adhuc, etiam nunc); cf.
Tit. 2, Claud. 19, Tib. 14, 3.
This use of hodieque is post-Aug.; first in
Velleius, then in Val. Max., Sen., Plin. N.H., and isolated instances in Quint.
and Tac. See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarbarus, I 597.
ad Gallinas: see on Dom. 1, 1, ad Malum Punicum. At Rome one of
the side-streets on the Viminal bore the name of "gallinae albae” (Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Rom I, 3, 374). The interesting ruins at Prima Porta
which have been identified with the villa of Livia, and the excavations which
have been made there, are described by Burn, Rome and the Campagna,
c. xiv; see also J.R.S. xi 145.
'illas: a correction by Burman (followed by Wolf, Baumg.-Crus., Roth,
Preud'homme) of alias (which is retained by Ihm). Lipsius suggested eas.
Pliny states definitely that the Caesars planted the same laurel branches
which they had carried in their hands during the triumph.
institutam: "planted"; cf. Suet. Gramm. 23, vitem manu eius institutam: Cic. Agr. ii 25, 67, iugera trecenta, ubi institui vineae possunt.
novissimo Neronis anno: 68 A.D.
exaruit interiit: Dio lxiii 29, καθάπερ που σαφῶς καὶ αἱ δάφναι αἱ ὑπὸ
τῆς Λιουίας φυτευθεῖσαι τό τε γένος τῶν λευκῶν ὀρνίθων προδιαφθαρέντα αὐτοῦ
(Νέρωνος) ἐσήμανεν: Aur. Vict. Caes. 5, 17, Hic finis Caesarum genti fuit;
quem fore prodigiorum multa denuntiavere, praecipueque eorum praediis
arescens lauri nemus dicatum triumphantibus; atque interitus gallinarum,
quae adeo multae albaeque aptiores erant religionibus, ut iis Romae habeatur
hodie locus. The withering of laurel trees is mentioned among the omens
of the fall of Troy in Quint. Smyrn. xii 517, ἀπαυαίνοντο δὲ δάφναι | πὰρ νηὸν
Φοίβοιο, πάρος θαλεραί περ ἐοῦσαι.
quidquid gallinarum erat: Suetonius is very fond of this use of quidquid c. gen. either of persons or things; e.g. Oth. 10, 2, quidquid epistularum
erat: Vitell. 10, 1, quidquid cohortium fuit. See Kühner-Stegmann, Lat.
Gramm. I 429.
subinde: this adv. is not ante-Aug.; Livy is the first prose writer to use
it. Suetonius has it in its two senses: (a) = mox, statim, as here and in
Galb. 10, 4: Vitell. 9: Tit. 5, 2; (b) identidem, saepius (Fr. souvent
from subinde), as in Galb. 3, 4; 16, 1.
=
Caesarum aede: the Templum Divi Augusti on the Palatine, begun by
Livia, continued by Tiberius, and completed by Caligula. Since in the
course of time all the deified members of the Julio-Claudian house were
worshipped there, it was known at the end of the first dynasty as the aedes
Caesarum. It was destroyed by fire under Vespasian, and restored by
Domitian; there was another restoration of it on a large scale by Antoninus
Pius. See Jordan-Huelsen, op. cit. I 3, 80 sq.; Marquardt, Röm. Staatsverwaltung iii² 468; Platner and Ashby, Topogr. Dict. of Ancient Rome
62 sqq.
sceptrum: the statue represented Augustus in triumphal garb bearing
the sceptre and wearing the tunica palmata and the toga picta; an ivory
sceptre crowned with an eagle was carried by the triumphator in his left
hand, and a laurel branch in his right (Dion. Hal. iii 61; Val. Max. iv 4, 5;
Juv. x 43; Mommsen, Röm. Staatsrecht is 425). In Aug. 94, 6 Suetonius
describes a vision, which Octavius, father of Augustus, had of the future
greatness of his son: sequenti nocte videre visus est filium mortali specie
ampliorem, cum fulmine et sceptro exuviisque Iovis Optimi Maximi ac
radiata corona, super laureatum currum bis senis equis candore eximio
trahentibus.
excussum est: cf. Dom. 15, 2 (on the portents of Domitian's death):
e basi statuae triumphalis titulus excussus vi procellae.
CHAPTER 2.
nullo gradu contingens Caesarum domum: Plutarch, Galb. 3, says that
Galba was related to Livia, wife of Augustus, and owed to her his consulship. Plutarch may be referring to the fact that Livia Ocellina, stepmother of Galba (see c. 3, 3), and Livia Drusilla, wife of Augustus, belonged
to the same gens; Hardy (on Plut. l.c.) thinks that Plutarch confused
Livia Ocellina with Livia Augusta.
For contingere used of family connexions cf. Aug. 4, 1, a matre Magnum
Pompeium artissimo contingebat gradu: Ner. 32, 2, ullae familiae quas
ipse contingeret: Juv. viii 7, multa contingere virga | fumosos equitum
cum dictatore magistros: id. xi 62, contingens sanguine caelum: Liv. xlv 7,
quos sanguine ac genere contingebat.
...
nobilissimus: cf. Tac. H. i 49 (of Galba), vetus in familia nobilitas,
magnae opes. claritas natalium: Aur. Vict. Caes. 6, 1, Galba haud secus
nobilis a gente clarissima Sulpiciorum: Eutrop. vii 16, Servius Galba
antiquissimae nobilitatis senator. Galba himself is represented by Tacitus
(i 15) as speaking proudly of his descent from the gens Sulpicia on his
father's side and the gens Lutatia on his mother's. Juvenal (viii 5) uses
the family of Galba as typical of the old noble families of Rome: pictos
ostendere vultus | maiorum et stantes in curribus Aemilianos | et Curios iam
dimidios umerosque minorem | Corvinum et Galbam auriculis nasoque
carentem.
prosapia:
an archaic word found in Plaut. Curc. 393, Merc. 626.
Sallust, who uses it in Iug. 85, 10, homo veteris prosapiae, is said to have
borrowed it from Cato's Origines (cf. Nonius p. 94 Lindsay). Cicero uses
it apologetically, Tim. 11, et eorum, ut utamur veteri verbo, prosapiam.
Quintilian (i 6, 40) mentions it as a specimen of the words "ab ultimis
et iam oblitteratis repetita temporibus" which are to be avoided, and later
(viii 3, 26) says that the use of it denotes a lack of taste: prosapiam
dicere insulsum est. The word has been variously connected with satus,
supare (dissipare), the Old Eng. sib "relationship," etc. Walde, Lat.
Etym. Wörterb., would connect it with the subst. sopio (see R. Ellis on
Catull. 37, 10).
ut qui statuarum titulis .. ascripserit: there is no other mention of
these statues of Galba, and in none of the extant inscriptions referring to
him is he thus described. A statua triumphalis would be included in the
triumphalia ornamenta which were bestowed on him for his victories in
Africa and Germany (c. 8, 1), and when he became emperor, numerous
statues would be erected in his honour (cf. Vitell. 9).
Quinti Catuli Capitolini: Galba's mother, Mummia Achaica, was the
granddaughter of Catulus. Galba's pride in this illustrious ancestor is
described in Plut. Galb. 3, μέγα δὲ ἔχων εὐγενείας ἀξίωμα τὸν Σερουΐων (i.e. the
Servii Sulpicii) οἶκον αὐτὸς ἐφρόνει μεῖζον ἐπὶ τῇ Κάτλου συγγενείᾳ, πρωτεύσαντος
ἀνδρὸς ἀρετῇ καὶ δόξῃ τῶν καθ᾽ ἑαυτόν, εἰ καὶ τὸ δύνασθαι μᾶλλον ἑκὼν ἑτέροις παρῆκεν.
Catulus, one of the leading optimates, was consul in 78 B.C., and when his
colleague Lepidus tried to overthrow the Sullan constitution he defeated
him in arms at the Mulvian Bridge in 77. He was one of the iudices who
condemned Verres (70). He opposed the Gabinian and Manilian Laws
(67, 66). He urged Cicero to include Caesar in the list of Catilinarian
conspirators, and in '62 Caesar as praetor tried in vain to deprive him of
the commissionership for the restoration of the Capitol (burned in 83), a
post which he had held since 78, and from which he got the cognomen
"Capitolinus"; his name remained inscribed on the temple till it was
again burned under Vitellius (Vitell. 15, 3). Cicero speaks in the most
glowing terms of Catulus, who is one of the interlocutors in the Academica
(see Reid, Introd. p. 73); he calls him one of the pillars of the state
(Brut. 222) and classes him with the ancient worthies of Rome (Verr. ii 3,
210). Catulus alone had the courage to rebuke equally the follies of the
mob and of the senate (Sest. 122); he was not only glorious in his life, but
fortunate in his death (Att. ii 24, 4). He died in 60 в.с.
stemma in atrio: in the atrium of the noble families at Rome were
placed the imagines, or waxen masks fitted to busts, kept in small cases
(armaria) under which were inscriptions (tituli) of the distinctions of the
various ancestors; the imagines were connected by painted lines (lineae)
and the imagines and lineae together made up the stemma or genealogical,
tree. Cf. Ner. 37, 1, obiectum est Cassio Longino quod in vetere gentili
stemmate C. Cassii percussoris Caesaris imagines retinuisset: Plin. N. H.
xxxv 6, aliter apud maiores in atriis haec erant quae spectarentur; non
..
signa exterorum artificum nec aera aut marmora: expressi cera vultus
singulis disponebantur armariis, ut essent imagines quae comitarentur
gentilicia funera... stemmata vero lineis discurrebant ad pictas imagines:
Sen. Ben. iii 28, 2, qui imagines in atrio exponunt et nomina familiae suae
longo ordine ex multis stemmatum illigata flexuris in parte prima aedium
collocant: Mart. iv 40, 1, atria Pisonum stabant cum stemmate toto.
originem ad Iovem referret: for such genealogical pretensions see
on Vesp. 12.
Pasiphaam: daughter of Helios and wife of Minos king of Crete; she
was a sister of Circe and of Aeetes the father of Medea. Pasiphaë is
notorious in legend as the mother of Minotaurus, and Galba must have
claimed descent from her merely because she was a daughter of the Sungod. Silius Italicus (Pun. viii 468 sqq.) attributes a similar mythical
pedigree to a Galba who commanded the Etruscan contingent at Cannae:
Iamque per Etruscos legio completa maniplos | rectorem magno spectabat
nomine Galbam. Huic genus orditur Minos, inlusaque tauro | Pasiphae.
Minonis: this form, and not the more usual Minois (Roth, Preud 'homme),
has the support of M here and in Tib. 70. Priscian (vi 13, 70) notices its
use in Sallust (Hist. ii frag. 5 Kritz): Daedalum ex Sicilia profectum, quo
Minonis fugerat iram atque opes.
Priscian says that similarly the
Syracusans used ἥρων, ἥρωνος for ἥρως, ἥρωος, and he also mentions “Athos
(Athon), Athonis” in Cicero, Rep. iii.
CHAPTER 3.
imagines: see on c. 2 and Vesp. 1, 1.
elogia: the inscriptions (tituli) under the imagines, giving the names,
honours, and achievements of each ancestor. elogium (connected by Curtius
with ἐλεγεῖον, cf. oliva ἐλαία, lopas λεπάς) is used by Cicero for an epitaph,
and for a clause in a will. Suetonius has it in both these senses (Claud. 1,5:
vit. Horat. 1); also for an inscription on a votive tablet (Calig. 24, 3),
and for an abstract or précis of a criminal case (Calig. 27, 1).
exequi: cf. Dom. 1, 3, n.
familiae attingam: the particular family of the gens Sulpicia
which bore the surname of Galba; other family names of the Sulpicii
under the Republic were Camerinus, Cornutus, Gallus, Longus, Paterculus,
Peticus, Praetextatus, Quirinus, Rufus.
"familiae” (sc. imagines et elogia) seems certainly to be the gen.,
though Dalmasso (p. 54) takes it as dat. The dat. with attingere only
occurs a few times (Apul. Apol. 100, C.I.L. ix 5438; see Thesaurus Ling.
Lat.). Suetonius uses the verb in twelve other passages, and always with
the accusative.
galbano: galbanum (χαλβάνη) was a resinous gum from a Syrian
plant; it was used for the purpose of smoking away serpents (Plin. N.H. xii
126; Verg. G. iii 415; Luc. ix 916; Nicand. Ther. 51, βαρύοδμος ἐπὶ φλογὶ
ζωγρηθεῖσα | χαλβάνη).
0
..
succenderit... uteretur.. visus sit: Suetonius frequently couples
the impf, and perf. subj. in this way, and seems to use these two tenses
quite indifferently; e.g. Vitell. 7, 2, ut domum
ablocaret, utque
unionem pigneraverit: Vesp. 4, 3, ut qui obligaret et descenderit:
Iul. 22; 39: Tib. 52: Claud. 4: Ner. 25, etc. See Draeger, Hist. Synt. i
270 sqq.; Roth, praef. p. xxxv; Bagge, p. 94; Dalmasso, p. 84.
..
galbeo: galbeus (calbeus) or galbeum was a kind of armlet or bracelet
according to the notices in Festus, p. 46 Müll., calbeos armillas dicebant,
quibus triumphantes utebantur; p. 96, galbeum ornamenti genus; p. 265
(quoting from Cato's Origines), mulieres opertae auro purpuraque
coronas aureas, rusceas fascias, galbeos, lineas, pelles, etc. Suetonius uses
it here for a bandage (= fascia, Dom, 17, 1) put round the arm like an
armlet, consisting of wool in which were wrapped healing medicines or,
at times, amulets; cf. Plin. N.H. xxx 143, stellionis ("newt'') cinerem
linamento (‘‘lint’”) involutum in sinistra manu venerem stimulare; xx 155,
Xenocrates pulei (“pennyroyal'') ramum lana involutum in tertianis ante
accessionem olefactandum dari tradit; Cels. vii 26, 5, inducendus hapsus
(i.e. a lock of wool used in bandaging) lanae mollis tepido oleo repletus;
id. iv '6, 9, circumdare oportet latus hapso lanae sulphuratae.
..
praepinguis quem galbam Galli vocent: this is probably the right
derivation of the name Galba (a Celtic word = venter obesus), so many
Roman cognomina denoted physical peculiarities. Cf. the Germ. Kalb (calf)
used for a fat person. For the numerous words cognate to Kalb, e.g. Sanser.
gárbhas (= uterus), Goth. kalbo, see Walde Etym. Wörterb. s.v. galba;
the root meaning is "swelling." We find mention of a king of the
Suessiones, a Gallic tribe, who bore the name of Galba (Caes. B.G. ii 4, 13),
and Galbus is a variant for Chalbus as a name of a Spanish chieftain
in Liv. xxiii 26. One of the Sulpicii may have got the nickname when
serving abroad. Hofstee compares the cognomen ‘“Arvina" ("fat"
"suet'") in the family of the Cornelii Cossi.
..
visus: Bentley would substitute for this either et obesus or ut vitulus.
animalia galbae: this "galba" is defined by Lewis and Short as
"a small worm, the ash-borer, or the larva of the ash-spinner, Bombyx
aesculi, Linn."; it does not seem to be mentioned elsewhere. An interesting parallel to this derivation of the name "Galba" would be "Cossus,''
as cossus is used frequently in Pliny for a kind of larva under the bark of
trees.
§ 2. familiam illustravit: Suetonius makes no reference to the ancestor
who first brought distinction to the family, viz. P. Sulpicius Ser. f. P. n.
Galba Maximus, who was elected consul in 211 B.C. without having filled
any curule office previously, and was consul again in 204 (Liv. xxv 41,
xxvi 1). Other ancestors who held office at Rome were C. Sulpicius Galba,
pontifex 201 B.C. (Liv. xxx 39, xxxii 7): Ser. Sulpicius Galba, curule aedile
in 188, urban praetor in 187 (Liv. xxxviii 35, etc.): C. Sulpicius Galba,
urban praetor in 171 (Liv. xlii 28, 31).
Servius Galba consularis: he was consul in 144 B.с., his colleague being
L. Aurelius Cotta.
vel: this is Bentley's correction of et, the reading of all MSS. except
I which omits the word. Casaubon proposed ditissimus et eloquentissimus,
introducing ditissimus from Appian Hisp. 60, where this Galba is called
πλουσιώτατος ῾Ρωμαίων, and this suggestion is approved by Burman.
Preud'homme keeps et; Ihm marks it as corrupt.
eloquentissimus: Cicero describes him as “eloquentissimus’(Brut. 33,
127) and “divinus homo in dicendo” (de or. i 10, 40); cf. also Brut. 21, 82,
sine controversia Ser. Galba eloquentia praestitit; et nimirum is princeps
ex Latinis illa oratorum propria et quasi legitima opera tractavit, ut egrederetur a proposito ornandi causa, ut delectaret animos, ut permoveret, ut
augeret rem, ut miserationibus, ut communibus locis uteretur. Sed nescio
quo modo huius, quem constat eloquentia praestitisse, exiliores orationes
sunt et redolentes magis antiquitatem quam aut Laelii aut Scipionis, aut
etiam ipsius Catonis; itaque exaruerunt, vix iam ut appareant.
Hispaniam ex praetura optinentem: he was praetor in 151, and in 150
was allotted the province of Hispania Ulterior where war was being waged
with the Celtiberians. He invaded Lusitania to relieve some Roman subjects there, and routed the Lusitanian forces, but pursuing them incautiously
met with a severe reverse and lost 7000 men. On his next invasion of
Lusitania the Lusitanians sent an embassy promising to resume the
observance of a treaty previously made with Rome. Galba treated them
with despicable treachery, pretending to sympathize with their poverty
which had led to their revolt, and promising to assign them fertile lands if
they assembled in three bodies, together with their women and children,
at three specified places. Each of the three bodies when it assembled was
ordered to surrender arms and being surrounded by a ditch, to prevent
escape, was massacred by Galba's troops. Viriathus was one of the few
who managed to escape. In 149 Galba was impeached for this outrage
and Cato, aged 85, denounced him in a speech of great vehemence, but by
bribery and by appearing as a suppliant along with his children and the
orphan child of a relative he succeeded in securing an acquittal. Appian
Hisp. 58-60; Cic. de or. i 53, 227; Val. Max. viii 1, 2; 7, 1; Plut. Cat. mai.
15; Nep. Cat. 3; Oros. iv 21.)
triginta milibus: Val. Max. (ix 6, 2) says 7000: septem milia, in
quibus flos iuventutis consistebat, electa et armis exuta, partim trucidavit,
partim vendidit. Quo facinore maximam cladem barbarorum magnitudine
criminis (Galba) antecessit.
Viriathini belli: after his escape from the massacre of the Lusitanians
by Galba, Viriathus organised a guerilla warfare against the Romans with
such success that in 145 and the following years a consul and consular army
had to be sent against him. These efforts to subdue him were ineffective,
and in 141 he entrapped the Roman army in a pass like the Caudine Forks
and forced the proconsul Fabius Servilianus to make peace. Servilius
Caepio, who commanded in Further Spain, renewed the war on some pretext
in 140, and bribed three envoys of Viriathus to assassinate him. After his
death (139 в.с.) the Lusitanians were driven to submit.
nepos: Servius Sulpicius Galba, who was a cousin of Decimus Brutus
(Cic. Fam. xi 7) and a friend of Cicero. A letter from him to Cicero is
still extant (Fam. x 30) giving an account of the battle at Forum Gallorum
02
in which M. Antonius was defeated during the siege of Mutina in 43 B.C.,
Galba commanding the legio Martia on the victorious side.
ob repulsam consulatus: Galba, urban praetor in 54, was a candidate
for the consulship in 49, but was defeated, as being an intimate friend and
officer of Caesar, by the party opposed to Caesar; cf. Hirt. Bell. Gall. viii
50, propterea quod insolenter adversarii sui (i.e. of Caesar) gloriarentur
L. Lentulum et C. Marcellum consules creatos, qui omnem honorem et
dignitatem Caesaris spoliarent, ereptum. Ser. Galbae consulatum, cum is
multo plus gratia suffragiisque valuisset, quod sibi coniunctus et familiaritate et necessitudine legationis esset. This defeat, however, could not have
been the cause of the bitter estrangement between Galba and Caesar, and
we must assume that at a subsequent date Caesar, when dictator, refused
Galba's claim to the consulship. For repulsam see on Vesp. 2, 3.
infensus Iulio Caesari: an instance of Galba's presumption and Caesar's
forbearance is given in Val. Max. vi 2, 11, Iam Ser. Galbae temeritatis
plena postulatio, qui Divum Iulium consummatis victoriis in foro ius
dicentem in hunc modum interpellare sustinuit: “C. Iuli Caesar, pro Cn.
Pompeio Magno, quondam genero tuo, in tertio eius consulatu (52 B.C.)
pecuniam spopondi, quo nomine nunc appellor. Quid agam? dependam?”
Palam atque aperte ei bonorum Pompei venditionem exprobrando ut a
tribunali summoveretur meruerat. Sed illud ipsa mansuetudine mitius
pectus (i.e. Caesar) aes alienum Pompei ex suo fisco solvi iussit. Cf. Cic.
Fam. vi 18.
legatus in Gallia: in 57 B.C. Caesar sent Galba as legatus to subdue the
Nantuates, Veragri, and Seduni; he defeated them and later resisted successfully a strong counter attack which they made on his camp at
Octodurus. (Caes. B.G. iii 1-6, Dio Cass. xxxvii 48, xxix 5.)
conspiravit: Galba's participation in the conspiracy against Caesar is
mentioned also by Appian (Bell. Civ. ii 113). Cicero (Phil. xiii 16) threatens
M. Antonius that Galba (“fortissimus et constantissimus civis’”) would use
on him the same dagger (pugio) as he had used to kill Caesar.
Pedia lege: a law proposed in 43 B.c. by the consul Q. Pedius, interdicting from fire and water all those who had taken part in the murder of
Julius Caesar: Vell. Pat. ii 69, 5, lege Pedia, quam consul Pedius, collega
Caesaris tulerat, omnibus qui Caesarem patrem interfecerant, aqua ignique
damnatis interdictum erat; cf. Monum. Ancyr. i 2, Qui parentem meum
[interfecer]un[t, eo]s in exilium expuli iudiciis legitimis ultus eorum
[fa]cin[us]. See Mommsen, Röm. Strafrecht 159, 199. Suetonius, Ner.
3, 1, says of Nero's great-grandfather: ‘“inter conscios Caesarianae necis
quanquam insons damnatus lege Pedia ... solusque omnium ex iis, qui
pari lege damnati erant, restitutus in patriam.'”
§ 3. avus: this C. Sulpicius Galba, the historian, is mentioned as one of
the authorities of the elder Pliny (N.H., index in lib. xxxvi). Peter (Hist.
Rom. Frag., p. 238) cites two references to his history: Plut. Rom. 17,
Ἑάλω δὲ καὶ (cum filia Tarpeia) Ταρπήϊος προδοσίας ὑπὸ ῾Ρωμύλου διωχθείς, ὡς
Ιόβας φησὶ Γάλβαν Σουλπίκιον ἱστορεῖν: Oros. v 23, 6, fuisse tunc Pompeio
triginta milia peditum, mille equites Galba scribit, Sertorium autem sexaginta milia peditum octo milia equitum habuisse commemorat.
non egressus praeturae gradum: cf. Oth. 1, 1, nec praeturae gradum
excessit. This use of egredi is found first in Velleius, and often in later
writers, e.g. Tac. A. iii 30, vetus familia neque tamen praeturam egressa.
incuriosam: an adjective used freely in post-Aug. Latin of persons,
either absolutely or with the gen., abl., or in (e.g. Aug. 79, 1, in capite
comendo incuriosus); its use in a passive sense of things, as here, is found
in Tac. A. vi 17, acribus, ut ferme talia, initiis, incurioso fine, and earlier
in a frag. of Sall. (H. iv 66, Kritz), infrequentem stationem nostram incuriosamque ab armis (= milites in statione positos, neque arma in promptu
habentes).
consulatu functus: in what year is uncertain, but he is probably the
"Ser. Sulpicius C. f. Galba" mentioned as consul suffectus in 5 B.C.
(C.I.L. i², p. 69).
quanquam: see on Tit. 7, 2.
gibber: "hunch-backed"; see on “gibba,” Dom. 23, 2. A witticism
of Augustus on Galba's deformity is quoted in Macrob. Sat. ii 4, 8:
Galbae, cuius informe gibbo erat corpus, agenti apud se causam et
frequenter dicenti: “Corrige, in me si quid reprehendis,” respondit: “Ego
te monere possum, corrigere non possum” (“corrigere" meaning "to make
straight the crooked"). The schoolmaster Orbilius also jested sarcastically
on the same subject; Macrob. ii 6, 4, In eundem Galbam Orbilius grammaticus acerbius inrisit. Prodierat Orbilius in reum testis. Quem Galba, ut
confunderet, dissimulata professione eius interrogavit: “Quid artium
facis?" Respondit: “In sole gibbos soleo fricare." In Suet. Gramm.
9, 2 (quoted on Dom. 23, 2) the repartee of Orbilius is given in a different
form and is directed against A. Terentius Varro Murena, not against Galba.
modicae in dicendo facultatis: Macrobius (ii 6, 3) rates his eloquence
more highly: In Galbam eloquentia clarum, sed quem habitus
corporis
destruebat, M. Lollii vox circumferebatur: Ingenium Galbae male habitat.
§ 4. Mummiam Achaicam: she may, as Borghesi says, be a daughter
of the Mummius who is mentioned as legatus of M. Crassus in the Servile
war against Spartacus in 71 B.с. (Plut. Crass. 10). See Dessau, Prosopographia Imperii Romani ii p. 389. The family of Mummius continued the
use of the cognomen ‘‘Achaicus" won by the consul L. Mummius in 146 в.с.
for the destruction of Corinth and the conquest of Greece, which was
transformed into the Roman province of Achaia.
Catuli: Q. Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus (see on c. 2).
Liviam Ocellinam: her father may have been the Lucius Livius Ocella
who was honoured with an inscription by two peoples of Hither Spain;
C.I.L. vi 246, L. Livio L. f. Ocellae quaestori) Segobrigenses. L. Livio
L. f. Ocellae Suessetanei (Dessau, Prosop. ii 290). The meaning of the
name "Ocella" is given in Plin. N.H. xi 150, qui altero lumine orbi
nascerentur Coclites vocabantur, qui parvis utrisque Ocellae; Luscini
iniuriae cognomen habuerunt.
subinde: see on c. 1.
quasi: causal; see on Tit. 5, 1.
Gaius: consul in 22 A.D. along with D.
C. Sulpicius D. Haterius consules sequuntur).
Haterius (Tac. A. iii 52,
The same account of his
death is given in Tac. A. vi 40, C. Galba consularis et duo Blaesi voluntario
exitu cecidere, Galba tristibus Caesaris litteris provinciam sortiri prohibitus.
He died in 36 A.D., fourteen years after his consulship.
anno suo: i.e. the year in which he became senior ex-consul (consularis).
Augustus enforced anew a rule of Pompeius that five years must elapse
between the tenure of magistracy and the sortitio provinciae; but a much
longer interval usually did elapse in the case of consular provinces owing
to the increase in the number of ex-consuls caused by the practice of
appointing consules suffecti (see on Dom. 2, 1). The consequent slowness
in succession to proconsulships was relieved to some extent by the fact
that some consulares were disqualified, or rejected by the emperor or by
the senate, or like Agricola declined the sortitio. See Furneaux, Tac. Ann.
vol. i², Introd. c. vii; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 251.
proconsulatum: either of Asia or Africa which were reserved for consulares, the other provinces being usually given to praetorii, though both
classes of governors are properly styled proconsuls (Furneaux, l.c.).
CHAPTER 4.
M. Valerio Messala: this is M. Valerius Corvinus Messala Messalinus,
son of M. Valerius Messala Corvinus (cons. 31 B.C.) who was the literary
patron of Ovid and Tibullus. The appointment of the son as one of the
Quindecimviri sacris faciundis was the occasion of an extant poem of
Tibullus (ii 5); cf. also Ov. Pont. i 7, ii 2. For his military achievements
as governor of Dalmatia and Pannonia see Dio lv 29 sqq., Vell. Pat. ii 112.
Cn. Lentulo: in the Index to Dio lv the names of the consuls for
3 B.c. are given as Λ. Κορνήλιος Λ. υἱ. Λεντοῦλος, καὶ Μ. Οὐαλέριος Μ. υἱ. Μεσσαλᾶς,
ἢ Μεσσαλίνοs (L. Cornelius L. f. Lentulus, et M. Valerius M. f. Messala
vel Messalinus); and in Monum. Ancyr. iii 16 the names appear as
L. Lentulus and M. Messala. The praenomen “Gnaeus" in our text is
probably due to a confusion by Suetonius or the copyists with Cn. Cornelius
Cn. f. Lentulus, consul in 14 B.c.; another Cn. Lentulus was consul in
18 в.с.
VIIII Kal. Ian: Dec. 24, 3 в.с.
date of Galba's birth and reconciling
see on c. 23.
For the difficulty of determining the
the conflicting statements of Suetonius
Terracinam: Terracina (usually "Tarracina Carracina'") is the mod. Terracina
in Latium, 62 miles from Rome, at the point where the Appia Via first
touches the sea coast. Latin poets preferred to use the Volscian name
Anxur as metrically more convenient than Tarrăcina. That Tarracina was
the home of the Galbae is confirmed by an inscription found there,
C.I.L. i 576, [Ser. Sulpic]ius Ser. f. Galba cos. pavimentum [faciendum
locavi]t eisdemque probavit (see Mommsen ad loc.).
Fundos: mod. Fondi, in Latium, 12 miles from Tarracina; mentioned
by Horace (S. i 5, 34) as the next stopping-place after Anxur (Tarracina)
on the journey to Brundusium.
petentibus: for this use of the dat. see on Vesp. 1, 3, a Nursia
Spoletium euntibus.
adoptatus a noverca: she must have adopted him by her will; a
similar instance of adoptio in nomen et familiam is mentioned in Cic.
Att. vii 8, Dolabellam video Liviae testamento cum duobus coheredibus
esse in triente, sed iuberi mutare nomen. Est πολιτικὸν σκέμμα rectumne
sit nobili adulescenti mutare nomen mulieris testamento. (Dolabella did
not accept the legacy at least he did not change his name; see Tyrrell
and Purser ad loc.). Under Roman law no woman could adopt during her
life, since she was not the head of a family and did not possess the patria
potestas; in 291 A.D. Diocletian and Maximian by a special rescript allowed
a woman to adopt her stepson to console her for the loss of her own children
(Cod. Iust. xlviii 8 Inst. Iust. i 11, 10). See Roby, Roman Private Law i
59 n.; Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 40.
Livi nomen: the stepmother's name was Livia Ocellina (c. 3, 4). The
reading Livii (Livi Roth, Preud'homme) is only found in later MSS.; the
earlier have Livia (read by Ihm), but this leaves nomen very bare. Heinsius
conjectured Livium; Bentley Livianum, which may well be right (-num
being lost before nomen).
Ocellare cognomen: i.e. the cognomen “Ocella”; cf. Hor. S. ii 3, 25,
Mercuriale cognomen: Ov. Pont. ii 5, 49, surgit Iuleo iuvenis cognomine
dignus. The ed. Basil. (1533 A.D.) reads Ocellae; so too Roth. This
cognomen of Galba's is not found in inscriptions or on coins.
mutato praenomine: the praenomen ‘"Lucius” assumed by Galba on
adoption was that of Lucius Livius Ocella, father of Livia Ocellina
(c. 3, 4, n.). As a praenomen of Galba it appears on gladiatorial tesseraė
(C.I.L. i 770, 771) where the consuls for 33 A.D. are given as L. Sulp. and
L. Sull.
usque ad tempus imperii: Dessau (Inscr. Lat. Sel. 237 n.) points out
that the title which Galba chose as emperor was "Ser. Galba imp. Caesar
Augustus," as is shown by the military diplomata issued by him to the
veterans of the First legion (Adiutrix); see Dessau 1988, C.I.L. x 770, 771.
But in Greek inscriptions in Egypt during his reign we find his adoptive
praenomen and nomen still appearing along with the nomen “Sulpicius”
and the cognomen ‘“Galba," e.g. in C.I.G. iii 4957 he is styled Λούκιος Λίβιος
Σεβαστός (= Augustus) Σουλπίκιος Γάλβα(ς) αὐτοκράτωρ (= imperator); so too on
Alexandrian coins, Λουκ. Λιβ. Σουλπ. Γάλβα(ς) Καισ. Σεβ. αὐτ. (see Prosop.
Imp. Rom. iii p. 285). Hofstee suggests that these inscriptions may have
been cut and the coins struck before it was known that the emperor had
discarded his adoptive names.
Augustum puero adhuc dixisse: Suetonius differs from Tacitus, Dio,
and Josephus in attributing this prophecy to Augustus and not to Tiberius.
Tacitus (A. vi 20) says: Non omiserim praesagium Tiberii de Servio Galba
tum (33 A.D.) consule; quem accitum et diversis sermonibus pertemptatum
postremo Graecis verbis in hanc sententiam adlocutus est: "et tu, Galba,
quandoque degustabis imperium,” seram ac brevem potentiam significans,
scientia Chaldaeorum artis, cuius apiscendae otium apud Rhodum, magistrum Thrasullum habuit. Dio (lvii 19) relates the prediction as made by
Tiberius to Galba at the time of his betrothal: οὕτω δ᾽ οὖν τὸ πεπρωμένον
ἑκάστῳ τῶν πρώτων καὶ ἐξήταζε καὶ ἠπίστατο ὥστε καὶ τῷ Γάλβα τῷ μετὰ ταῦτα
αὐταρχήσαντι ἀπαντήσας, γυναῖκα ἐγγεγυημένῳ, εἰπεῖν ὅτι “καὶ σύ ποτες τῆς
ἡγεμονίας γεύσῃ." Josephus (Antiq. xviii 6) cites it as a remark of Tiberius to
his intimates when he saw Galba come in to him: Γάλβαν οὖν ποτὲ θεασάμενος
ὡς αὐτὸν εἰσιόντα, φησὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιτηδειοτάτους αὐτῷ, ὡς παραγίνοιτο ἀνὴρ τῇ
῾Ῥωμαίων ποτὲ προτιμησόμενος ἡγεμονίᾳ.
salutanti: for the imperial receptions (salutationes) see on Vesp. 4, 4.
apprehensa buccula: this may mean merely that Augustus took hold of
his cheek; cf. Ap. Rhod. Arg. iii 128 (where Aphrodite is coaxing her young
son Eros), γναθμοῖο κατασχομένη προσέειπε. Most commentators think that
there is a reference to the peculiar method of kissing children by placing
one's fingers on their lips or on their cheek and then withdrawing the
fingers and placing them on one's own lips; cf. Apul. Met. vi 22, Iuppiter
prehensa Cupidinis buccula manuque ad os suum relata consaviat: Suet.
Aug. 94, 8, quasi Iuppiter
eius (pueri) osculum delibatum digitis ad
os suum rettulisset: Serv. on Aen. i 260 (oscula libavit natae), Sane multi
nolunt ita intellegi, ut summum osculum filiae dederit, id est, non pressum,
sed summa labella contingens; sed ita aiunt: tum hilaris Iuppiter vultus
natae libavit, id est, contigit, scilicet ut nos solemus cum blandimentis quibusdam sinistram maxillam contingere liberorum et deinde ad os nostrum
referre.
παρατρώξῃ : = degustabis. παρατρώγειν means "to nibble at the side," "take a
bite of" (Aristoph. Ran. 988, Pax 415); used metaph. in Philostrat. 595, παρατρώγειν δικῶν τε καὶ δικαστηρίων. Aristophanes also uses περιτρώγειν (e.g. Vesp. 672,
σὺ δὲ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀγαπᾶς τῆς σῆς τοὺς ἀργελόφους περιτρώγων) and ἀποτρώγειν
(Ran. 367, τοὺς μισθοὺς τῶν ποιητῶν . . ἀποτρώγει).
sed et: as sed et is used after non modo, non solum, etc., so it is used
fairly frequently in Silver and late Lat. with a cumulative or intensive
force ("and what is more,” “aye, and") even when non modo, etc., are
omitted. See the examples cited by Draeger, Hist. Synt. ii² 109. Suetonius
is fond of this use; e.g. Aug. 31, 3, sacerdotum et numerum et dignitatem,
sed et commoda auxit. He several times (as here) begins a sentence or
clause with sed et when introducing a further instance or confirmation in
development of what he has previously said; cf. Vitell. 14, 3: Vesp. 19, 1:
19, 2: Dom. 13, 1.
Cicero uses sed etiam with an ellipse of non solum,
e.g. Att. iii 15, 5, hic mihi primum meum consilium defuit, sed etiam
ob fuit.
Vivat ad nos nihil pertinet: a very similar utterance is attributed
to Caracallus by Capitolinus (Maxim. Iun. c. 4): Nec defuerunt qui
cavendum infantem (Maximinum) dicerent Caracallo. Tum ille dixit
"longe est ut mihi iste succedat." Dio (lvii 17) conjectures that Tiberius
spared Galba because Galba's fate had so ordained it, but adds that
Tiberius' own explanation was that Galba would reign only in old age
and long after his own death.
§2. Avo: C. Sulpicius Galba, the historian (c. 3, 3).
fulgur procuranti: procurare was a technical term for averting by
prayer, sacrifice, etc., the evil effects of portents of all kinds, especially
lightning and thunderbolts; cf. Val. Max. i 1, 1, sacrificio ostentorum ac
fulgurum denuntiationes procurantur. The ars fulminum, derived by the
Romans from the Etruscans and their libri fulgurales, was divided into
exploratio, interpretatio, and exoratio (Sen. N.Q. ii 32, 2). procuratio
and expiatio are often used as synonyms of exoratio. Part of the procuratio
carried out by the fulgurator, or lightning-interpreter, was to encircle the
place which had been struck by lightning with a stone curb (puteal) and
to make sacrifices of sheep (bidentes; hence bidental = puteal).
frugiferam quercum: the portent probably occurred in the autumn;
the eagle flew to the top of the oak, showing the height to which Galba
would attain; the oak was already bearing acorns, which foretold that
Galba would only obtain the empire in his old age (he was in his 73rd year
when he became emperor).
cum mula pepererit: a proverbial expression, like our "when pigs fly";
cf. Plin. N.H. viii 173, Observatum
mulas non parere. Est in annalibus
nostris peperisse saepe, verum prodigii loco habitum: Cic. Div. ii 22, 49,
mulae partus prolatus a te: res mirabilis, quia non saepe fit; ii 28, 61,
saepius enim mulam peperisse arbitror quam sapientem fuisse: Juv. xiii 64,
egregium sanctumque virum si cerno, ... fetae comparo mulae. In Hdt. iii
151 a Babylonian says jeeringly that the Persians would take Babylon
“ ἐπεὰν ἡμίονοι τέκωσι” (cf. Hdt. vii 57; Arist. H.A. vi 24; ausc. mirab. 70).
confirmavit mulae partus: Dio lxiv 1, ἡμίονός τε ἔτεκεν, ὅπερ αὐτῷ
(i.e. Galba) σύμβολον τοῦ κράτους ἔσεσθαι ἐτεθέσπιστο.
ut obscaenum ostentum: Livy (xxvi 23, xxxvii 3) mentions “mulam
peperisse" among "prodigia maioribus hostiis procurata." Walde derives
obscaenus from *obs- (ob) and caenum "filth"; it was regularly used in
the sense of "inauspicious," cf. Paulus (Fest. p. 201 Müll.), apud antiquos
omnes fere obscaena dicta sunt, quae mali ominis habebantur: Cic. dom. 55,
140, obscaenum omen: Verg. Aen. xii 876, obscaenae volucres.
abhorrentibus: here c. acc., as in Aug. 83, Vitell. 10, 3; Suetonius is
the first to use this constr. (Cic. Cluent. 14, 41 is not an example, see
Peterson's note). Suetonius also uses abhorrere a re (Ner. 43, 1: Dom. 9, 1),
and employs the verb impersonally in Tib. 62, 3, Calig. 12, 3, abhorret a
vero, a veritate.
§ 3. sumpta virili toga: see on Vesp. 2, 2. Dio (lvi 29) says that it
was on Jan. 1, 14 A.D. that Galba assumed the toga virilis (ἐς τοὺς ἐφήβους
ἐνεγράφη), and that some afterwards regarded it as a remarkable coincidence
that Augustus died in this year and that Galba was the first to become
emperor after the family of Augustus died out with Nero.
See
somniavit Fortunam dicentem: Suetonius here extends to somniare
the same construction (predicative pres. part.) as is commonly found with
“verba videndi, audiendi, fingendi, etc." (Kühner-Stegmann, i 703). Не
varies the constr. in c. 18, 2, somniavit speciem Fortunae querentis.
also on Dom. 15, 3, Minervam
somniavit excedere negantemque. The
same dream of Galba's is narrated in Dio lxiv 1, την τε γὰρ Τύχην ἔδοξεν
αὐτῷ λέγειν ὅτι χρόνον ἤδη συχνὸν αὐτῷ παραμένοι καὶ ὅτι οὐδεὶς αὐτὴν ἐς τὴν οἰκίαν
αὐτοῦ ἐσδέχοιτο, καὶ δὴ ἐὰν ἐπὶ πλεῖον εἰρχθῇ, πρὸς ἕτερόν τινα μεταστήσεται,
stare defessam: prob. "tired of standing"; for the infin. instead of
the abl. ger. cf. Plaut. Epid. 719, ego sum defessus reperire, vos defessi
quaerere: Lucr. v 1145, genus humanum defessum vi colere aevom.
ocius: "at once,'' cf. Iul. 68, 2, ocius amoveri; in Cic. ocius has always
a comparative sense "more quickly," but the meaning "at once" is
common in colloquial Lat. and in poetry.
cuicumque: the use of quicumque in the sense of quivis, quilibet (cf,
Vitell. 14, 1; Vesp. 8, 5) is frequent in Livy (see Riemann, La Langue de
Tite-Live 178 sq.) and post-Aug. writers. Cic. and Caes. nearly always use
quicumque as a rel. with a verb expressed, except in the abl., e.g. quacumque ratione, quocumque modo; there are only a couple of examples in Cic.
of the indefinite use in cases other than the abl. (Madvig, Cic. Fin.,
Excursus vi p. 834).
evigilavit: in the sense of expergisci this verb is post-Aug.
simulacrum: this image is mentioned again in c. 18, 2, in connexion
with the omens of Galba's downfall.
cubitali: sc. simulacro; cf. Plin. N.H. viii 73, maiora cubitalibus
cornua habens: xxii 86, frutex est nunquam cubitali altior.
Tusculum: in Latium, about 15 miles from Rome on the Via Latina,
mod. Frascati and Il Tuscolo; a favourite site for the villas of the wealthy
Romans, e.g. Cicero, Julius Caesar, and Tiberius.
aestivare: see on Vesp. 24.
in parte aedium: this use of parte without a defining adjective is
strange, and Boissevain suggested in <prima > parte (i.e. atrio), comparing Nep. praef. 6, Sen. Bem. iii 28, Val. Max. v 8, 3. Under subsequent
emperors we find a golden statue of Fortuna which was kept in the
imperial bedchamber and was transferred by each emperor to his successor;
cf. Capitol. Anton. Pius 12, cum se gravari videret, Marco Antonino rem
publicam commendavit, Fortunamque auream, quae in cubiculo principum poni solebat, transferri ad eum iussit: Capitol. Marc. Anton.
Philos. 7: Spartian. Sev. 23. The goddess Fortuna figures on the coins of
Galba (Cohen, Méd. Imp. i² pp. 323, 343).
pervigilio: these all-night vigils (παννυχίδες) for religious purposes
were unknown to the primitive worship of the Romans but were introduced
along with the Greek and oriental religions of which they were so prominent
a feature, and they came to be celebrated in Italy with no less licentiousness
than in Greece. The nightly ceremonies which formed part of such rites
as those of the Bona Dea, Bacchus, Isis, Ceres, Adonis, and Sabazius often.
developed into mere orgies and were the occasion of grave scandals (Cic.
Leg. ii 14 sq.). Cf. Vitell. 10, 3.
§ 4. quanquam: see on Tit. 7, 2.
aetate constanti: settled age" "middle age," ἡ καθεστηκυία ἡλικία:
cf. Cic. Sen. 20, 76, ea constans iam aetas, quae media dicitur.
exoletum: cf. Claud. 22, aut exoleta revocavit, aut etiam nova instituit:
Aug. 86, 2, exoletas et reconditas voces aucupari. Cicero prefers obsoletus.
See also on c. 22. The custom mentioned here is not referred to by other
writers.
salvere.. valere: the ordinary morning salutation was either salve or
ave (= χαῖρε); the farewell at the end of day was vale (= ὑγίαινε or ἔρρωσο).
The person so addressed replied salve et tu (καὶ σὺ χαῖρε) or vale et tu
(καὶ σὺ ὑγίαινε).
CHAPTER 5.
liberales disciplinas: cf. Ner. 52, liberales disciplinas omnes fere puer
attigit: Calig. 53, 1, ex disciplinis liberalibus minimum eruditioni,
eloquentiae plurimum attendit: Claud. 3, 1, disciplinis liberalibus ab aetate
prima non mediocrem operam dedit: Dom. 20, liberalia studia imperii
initio neglexit: Aug. 84, 1, eloquentiam studiaque liberalia ab aetate prima
et cupide et laboriosissime exercuit. Under liberales disciplinae were included rhetoric, philosophy, music, poetry, jurisprudence, etc.; cf. Cic. de
or. iii 32, 127, has artes, quibus liberales doctrinae atque ingenuae continerentur, geometriam, musicam, litterarum cognitionem et poetarum.
attendit iuri: attendere (προσέχειν), when used absolutely (without
animum), takes the acc. in class. Lat., but Vitruvius and later writers use
it also with the dat. This is the only construction found in Suetonius;
cf. Calig. 53, 1 (quoted above), Ner. 56, attendit et extispicio.
dedit matrimonio operam: in the general laxity of morals which
prevailed at Rome matrimony was regarded as a troublesome business, an
onerous duty to be undertaken by loyal citizens in the interest of the state.
Lepida: not mentioned by name elsewhere, but she was probably
the daughter of Manius Aemilius Lepidus, proconsul of Asia in 26-7 A.D.
(Tac. A. iv 56), who excused himself from accepting the proconsulship of
Africa in 21 A.D. on the ground that he had to arrange for the marriage
of a "nubilis filia” (Tac. A. iii 35).
quatenus sibi
remansit in caelibatu: cf. Claud. 26, 2, confirmavit
matrimonia male cederent, permansurum se in caelibatu. Widowers, as
well as bachelors, were described as “caelibes.”
condicione: condicio (uxoria) was used for a marriage-proposal and the
attendant negotiations, an alliance or match, and sometimes (by metonymy)
for the person to be married; cf. Iul. 27, 1, Octaviam condicionem ei
detulit: Aug. 63, 2, multis ac diu, etiam ex equestri ordine, circumspectis
condicionibus, Tiberium privignum suum legit: Cic. Lael. 34, dirimi
(amores) tamen interdum contentione vel uxoriae condicionis vel commodi
alicuius: Plin. Ep. i 10, inter altissimas condiciones, generum non honoribus
principem, sed sapientia, elegit.
Agrippinae: daughter of Germanicus, married first (in 28 A.D.) to
Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus to whom she bore a son Nero, afterwards
emperor; immediately after the death of Domitius in 40 A.D. she was
banished by her own brother Caligula (Ner. 6), but was recalled from
exile on the accession of Claudius in 41; shortly afterwards she married
Crispus Passienus and was believed to have murdered him; later (in 51)
she married her uncle, the emperor Claudius, such a union being legalised
by a special senatus-consultum. For her death see on Oth. 3,1. Dalmasso
takes Agrippinae here as dative of the agent, but it is the gen. after
condicione; cf. Claud. 26, 3, nec durare valuit quin de condicionibus continuo tractaret, etiam de Paetinae, quam olim exegerat, deque Lolliae
Paulinae, quae C. Caesari nupta fuerat.
viduatae: M and G have viduata, which is read by Ihm who follows
Becker in inserting quae before viduata. The relative, which in n and Q
comes after Domitii, is omitted in the other MSS.
Domitii: Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus; see on Oth. 2, 1.
conventu matronarum: at Rome from ancient times there was a conventus matronarum, apparently a guild of religious origin, of which little
is known. Assemblies of matrons are mentioned in Liv. v 25, xxvii 37.
Seneca (De Matrimon. ed. Haase iii p. 428) describes how a husband has
to listen to his wife's nightlong reproaches: per noctes totas garrulae
conquestiones “illa ornatior procedit in publicum, haec honoratur ab
omnibus, ego in conventu feminarum misella despicior." The guild had
its curia or meeting-place on the Quirinal and perhaps another in Trajan's
Forum. It met for certain festivals, also when a bride through her
marriage entered the class of consulares feminae. Elagabalus built a
senate-house (senaculum) for it on the Quirinal, and this feminine senate
decided a number of points of etiquette: “quae quo vestitu incederet,
quae cui cederet, etc." (Lamprid. Heliogab. 4). Aurelian seems to have
restored its old religious character by assigning the highest position in it
to those who had been priestesses (Vopisc. Aurel. 49). See Friedlaender,
Sittengeschichte i¹º 282: Daremberg-Saglio, Dict. Antiq. iii 1660.
observant.
§ 2. observavit: for observare “to show respect to” (θεραπεύειν) cf.
Tib. 70, 1, quem senem adulescens observaverat: Cic. Att. ii 19, Caecilium
colimus et observamus diligenter: Verg. G. iv 210, regem
The reverence of Galba for Livia Augusta is shown by his coins with her
image and the legend Augusta or Diva Augusta (Eckhel, Doctrina numorum
veterum, vi pp. 292-3).
Liviam Augustam: i.e. Livia Drusilla, wife of Augustus; see on c. 1, 1.
By the will of Augustus she was adopted into the Julian family and
received the title of Augusta: Tac. A. i 8, Livia in familiam Iuliam nomenque Augustum adsumebatur. After this adoption Tacitus always speaks
of her as "Augusta” or “Iulia Augusta"; Suetonius has "Iulia Augusta"
in Calig. 16, 3, and "Augusta" in Claud. 3, 2, but inaccurately styles
her "Livia Augusta'' here and in Oth. 1, 1; Calig. 10, 1; 15, 2; 23, 2.
plurimum valuit: according to Plutarch (Galb. 3) he owed to her his
consulship (see on c. 2, 1), but this is doubtful, since Livia died in 29 A.D.
and Galba was not consul till 33 (Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii p. 285).
namque: this is the only instance in Suetonius of namque occupying
the second place, as in Varro ap. Gell. iii 10, is namque numerus, and
frequently in Livy and Quintilian; in Cic. and Caes. it always begins the
sentence (Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. ii 109).
quingenties: sc. centena milia, 50,000,000 sesterces, about £425,000.
Casaubon regarded this sum as incredibly large, and would read quinquagies,
i.e. 5,000,000.
praecipuum: here used as a subst. denoting a first charge on an estate,
what is taken from it before the general distribution of the assets, the
adj. being often used in this sense in legal writers, e.g. praecipua dos (Ulp.
Dig. xxxiii 4, 2); cf. Sidon. Apoll. Ep. vi 12, illud autem deberi tibi
quodam, ut iurisconsulti dicunt, praecipui titulo. In Plin. Ep. v 7 we find
praecipere 'to take preferentially and praeceptio “a preferential legacy."
legatarios: "legatees"; a word apparently first used here but common
in the later legal writers.
=
500,000 sesterces and
notata: i.e. merely marked in figures or symbols and not written fully
in words; the difference between HS D
HSD = 50,000,000 sesterces is very slight.
quingenta: sc. sestertia; 500,000 sesterces.
revocante: this use of revocare in the sense of reducing is remarkable,
and no other example is cited; Suetonius elsewhere uses the normal redigere
ad or recidere ad. For the aoristic use of the present participle (= cum
revocasset) see Appendix I. § 10. b.
ne haec quidem accepit: Tiberius suppressed the will of his mother
Livia and paid none of the legacies; cf. Dio lix 1, οὐδὲν οὐδενὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐκείνης
διαθηκῶν ἀπήλλαξεν. Suetonius (Calig. 16, 3) says that Caligula paid these
legacies and those under Tiberius' own will (though it had been set aside)
faithfully and without dispute: legata ex testamento Tiberi quanquam.
abolito, sed et Iuliae Augustae, quod Tiberius suppresserat, cum fide ac
sine calumnia repraesentata persolvit.
CHAPTER 6.
ante legitimum tempus: Augustus issued an ordinance determining the
conditions and sequence of the magistracies in the cursus honorum.
The young Roman, before holding the first of these magistracies, the
quaestorship, had to qualify himself by a term in one of the departments
of the vigintivirate (decemviri stlitibus iudicandis, quattuorviri viarum
curandarum, triumviri capitales, triumviri monetales) and by some brief
military experience, generally as tribunus militum; the earliest age for the
quaestorship was 25; a year must elapse between this and the next magistracy, the tribuneship of the plebs (or the curule aedileship), and between
either of these offices and the praetorship, and a period of two years
between the praetorship (minimum age 30 years) and the consulship (minimum age 32). The restriction of attaining a certain age for an office or
waiting for a certain period between offices could be removed by the candidate being father of three children (ius trium liberorum) or by special grace
of the emperor. See Mommsen, Staatsr. I³ 572 sqq.
praetor
edidit: under the Republic the aediles (first appointed in
366 в.с.) were gradually given control of all the games except the Ludi
Apollinares and Piscatorii which were in the charge of the praetors. In
22 B.C. Augustus transferred the cura ludorum to the praetors, assigning
to them the management of all games and spectacles (Dio liv 2, τοῖς μὲν·
στρατηγοῖς τὰς πανηγύρεις πάσας προσέταξεν). We find references to the
praetors administering the Ludi Megalenses (Juv. xi 193), Florales (Dio
lxxviii 3), the Augustalia (Tac. A. i 15), gladiatorial shows (Dio lv 31), etc..
See Mommsen, op. cit. ii³ 237.
comcommissione: the regular word for the opening of the games.
mittere (like συμβάλλειν, συνιέναι) meant to bring men together (in a hostile
sense), to set them to fight; it was used primarily of pitting or matching
gladiators in the arena, and then more widely of starting a contest or games
of any kind; cf. Ner. 23, 1, commisit musicum agona: Claud. 21, 1, ludos
dedicationis Pompeiani theatri e tribunali posito in orchestra commisit.
ludorum Floralium: the Floralia or Ludi Florales were a festival first
celebrated in 238 B.c., when in consequence of a dearth a temple was dedicated to Flora ad Circum Maximum; it was made an annual festival
(Apr. 28-May 3) under the charge of the aediles in 173 B.c., and consisted
mainly of theatrical performances, especially by mimi, accompanied by
drinking and licentious merrymaking; cf. Cic. Verr. v 14, 36: Val. Max.
ii 10, 8: Sen. Ep. 97: Mart. i 35. The games concluded with the coursing
of hares and roes in the Circus Maximus (Ov. Fast. v 371). See Warde
Fowler, Roman Festivals 92 sqq.
elephantos funambulos: an elephant on tight ropes was a feature of
the spectacles of Nero; cf. Ner. 11, 2, notissimus eques Romanus elephanto
supersidens per catadromum decucurrit (a performance more clearly described by Dio, lxi 17, who says that an elephant which had been brought
up to the top of the theatre ran down stretched ropes with a rider on its
back: ἐλέφας ἀνήχθη ἐς τὴν ἀνωτάτω τοῦ θεάτρου ἁψίδα καὶ ἐκεῖθεν ἐπὶ σχοινίων
κατέδραμεν ἀναβάτην φέρων). Pliny (N.H. viii 3) marvels at such elephants:
mirum maxime et adversis quidem funibus subire, sed regredi magis utique
pronis; Seneca also mentions them (Ερ. 85, 41): elephantem minimus
Aethiops iubet subsidere in genua et ambulare per funem. Numerous references to the rope-walker (funambulus, schoenobates, σχοινοβάτης) are
collected by Mayor on Juv. xiv 272.
provinciae Aquitaniae
praefuit: as a legatus Augusti pro praetore,
probably in 31 or 32 A.D. (see Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 285). Augustus divided
Gallia into four provinces: Narbonensis, Aquitania, Lugdunensis, and
Belgica. In 22 B.c. he assigned Narbonensis to the senate, while the others
remained under imperial legati. Aquitania was in Southern Gaul, between
the Loire and the Pyrenees.
anno: for the ablative of duration of time see App. I § 3. D. b.
consulatum ordinarium: for the distinction between consules ordinarii
and consules suffecti and the period for which the office was held see note
on Dom. 2, 1. Galba was consul in 33 A.D.
L. Domitio: Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus; see on c. 5, 1: Oth. 2, 1. The
praenomen “Lucius" instead of "Gnaeus" is a slip on the part of
Suetonius or the copyists. "Lucius" was the praenomen of his father
(cons. 16 в.с.). Torrentius corrected L. to Cn.; Ihm suggests as an alternative the deletion of L.
Salvius Otho pater Othonis: see Oth. 1, 2; as consul suffectus he succeeded Galba in the consulship on the Kalends of July, 33 A.D.
§ 2. Gaio Caesare: i.e. Caligula, who reigned from 37 to 41. Galba's
appointment was made in 39.
८
<in locum Gaetulici substitutus: a conjectural restoration by Roth,
which is adopted by Preud'homme; in the MSS. there is a lacuna between
in locum
Caesare and lici (al, licio, licis, liciis, lice). Ihm reads <.....
Gaetulici, suggesting legatus Germaniae superioris in locum Gaetu>lici.
Madvig, who regarded Roth's method of filling the gap as inadequate, proposed <in administratione exercitus Germanici in locum Gaetulici. Earlier
readings are Gartulico (Stephanus, Turnebus) and Gaetulici vice (Heinsius).
Gaetulici: Cn. Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus, who inherited the cognomen "Gaetulicus" received by his father Cossus Cornelius Lentulus
Gaetulicus for victories over the Gaetuli in Africa in 6 A.D. He was consul
in 26 A.D., and afterwards commanded the legions in Upper Germany for
ten years, the mildness of his discipline making him immensely popular:
mirum amorem adsecutus erat, effusae clementiae, modicus severitate (Tac.
A. vi. 30). His daughter was betrothed to Sejanus, and it was generally
believed that Tiberius would have had him condemned along with the other
connexions of Sejanus at the latter's downfall, had he not feared a revolt
of the legions in Germany (Tac. l.c.). Caligula put him to death in 39 A.D.,
charging him with conspiracy and currying favour with the army (Dio lix
22, Suet. Claud. 9). As an epigrammatist he is mentioned in Mart. i praef.;
Plin. Εp. v 3, 5. From the fact that in Suet. Calig. 8 he is cited as an
authority on the birthplace of Caligula he is supposed to have written
history (see Peter, Hist. Rom. Frag. p. 291).
tessera: the tessera militaris (σύμβολον) had two uses: (1) to make
known to the soldiers the password; (2) to circulate any orders of the
general as to intended movements, etc.; for this latter use cf. Liv. ix 32
quod postquam consuli nuntiatum est, extemplo tesseram dari iubet, ut
prandeat miles firmatisque cibo viribus arma capiat: Liv. vii 35, xxvii 46:
Sil. Ital. vii 347, discurrit tessera castris | intentique docent quae sint
properanda, monentque | quisque suos: xv 475.
ut manus paenula continerent: a reading introduced by Salmasius, the
MSS. varying between manus paenulas, manus paenulis, and manu paenulas.
The paenula was a sleeveless cloak of frieze or leather drawn on over the
head and worn by all classes in bad weather or when travelling; its use
by soldiers is mentioned in Ner. 49: Sen. Ben. v 24, 1. In its ordinary
form it prevented any free movement of the arms (cf. paenulatus = paenula
irretitus, Cic. Mil. 10) and in a couple of the very few representations on
monuments of soldiers wearing the paenula (and not the sagum) there are
openings for one or both arms. See Baumeister, Denkmäler p. 1836:
Marquardt, Privatl.2 564 sqq.: Smith, Dict. Ant. ii³ 308.
Disce
...
Gaetulicus: a trochaic tetrameter catalectic or trochaic
septenarius (IC/II/IC/IC/II/II/IC/C), which was a favourite
metre for the soldier's ditties; cf. the very free lines on Caesar's immorality
which were shouted by his soldiers in the licence of his Gallic triumph,
Iul. 51: “Urbani, servate uxores; moechum calvum adducimus. | Aurum
in Gallia effutuisti, hic sumpsisti mutuum"; ib. 49, "Gallias Caesar
subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem: | ecce Caesar nunc triumphat qui subegit
Gallias, | Nicomedes non triumphat qui subegit Caesarem.”
§ 3. interdixit peti: the infin. for the usual ne c. subj.; the dat.
and infin. are found in Sen. Vit. Beat. 18, 3, cum sibi interdixerit habere,
interdixit et poscere. (Ter. Phorm. 708 is wrongly cited by L. and S. as
an example of interdicere with infin.).
commeatus: among the abuses in the army at this period was the
improper granting of furlough, the soldiers being able to purchase from
the centurions exemption from duties (vacatio munerum) and leave of
absence (see Tac. H. i 46, A. i 17); weak commanders allowed the legions
to be depleted by grants of furlough and this at times led to disaster, e.g.
the defeat of Paetus by the Parthians in 62 A.D. (legiones promiscis militum
commeatibus infirmaverat, Tac. A. xv 9).
barbaris
coercitis: Galba was victorious over the Chatti (see on
Dom. 6, 1) in 41 A.D.; Dio lx 8, τούτῳ τῷ ἔτει ὁ Γάλβας ὁ Σουλπίκιος Χάττους
ἐκράτησε. His distinguished command of the army in Germany is mentioned in Plut. Galb. 3, λέγεται δὲ καὶ στρατεύματος ἐν Γερμανίᾳ καλῶς ἄρξαι :
Tac. H. i 49, dum vigebat aetas, militari laude apud Germanias floruit.
praesenti Gaio approbavit: for Caligula's expedition to Germany
in 39 A.D. see on Vesp. 2, 3. On that campaign the emperor posed as a
stern disciplinarian; cf. Calig. 44, 1, postquam castra attigit, ut se acrem
et severum ducem ostenderet, legatos, qui auxilia serius ex diversis locis
adduxerant, cum ignominia dimisit. At in exercitu recensendo, plerisque
centurionum maturis iam, et nonnullis ante paucissimos, quam consummaturi
essent, dies, primos pilos ademit, causatus senium cuiusque et imbecillitatem:
ceterorum increpita cupiditate, commoda emeritae militiae ad sex milium
summam recidit.
..
innumeras copias: Calig. 43, legionibus et auxiliis undique excitis,
dilectibus ubique acerbissime actis, contracto et omnis generis commeatu,
quanto numquam antea, iter ingressus est. Dio (lix 22) gives the number
as 200,000 or 250,000.
campestrem decursionem: decursus and decursio were terms applied
sometimes to a defile of soldiers under arms on ceremonial occasions
(funerals, etc.), sometimes, as here, to manoeuvres designed to accustom
the soldiers to carry out rapidly long marches in full armour and to keep
their ranks. Vegetius (de arte mil. i 9) says that recruits were trained
to cover in five summer hours (almost 6t of our hours) at an ordinary
marching pace (militari gradu) a distance of 20 milia passuum, and in
the same time at an accelerated pace (pleno gradu, qui citatior est) 24 milia
passuum. Scipio Africanus made his troops execute on every fourth day
a decursio of 4 milia passuum (Liv. xxvi 51); cf. also Liv. xxiii 35, xxiv 48,
xl 6, 47, xlii 52; Tac. A. ii 55). Vegetius calls such manoeuvres campicursio,
See Daremberg-Saglio,
which is the same as campestris decursio here.
ii p. 41.
scuto moderatus: Galba controlled the manoeuvres, marching in front
and bearing the heavy scutum with which he directed the various movements;
cf. Ner. 7, 2, where Nero at the beginning of his public career personally
headed the praetorians at a special command display of manoeuvres: indicta decursione praetorianis scutum sua manu praetulit.
etiam: even after the fatiguing decursio he had energy enough leït
to run for such a long distance by the emperor's chariot.
ad essedum cucurrit: Caligula also made senators in their togas run
by his chariot; Calig. 27, nihilo reverentior leniorve erga senatum: quosdam summis honoribus functos ad essedum sibi currere togatos per aliquot
passuum milia
.. passus est. In 297 A.D. Diocletian treated in the same
humiliating way his son-in-law Galerius, in anger at his defeat by the
Persians; Amm. Marc. xiv 11: Eutrop. ix 15, Galerius pulsus (a Persis)
et ad Diocletianum profectus, cum ei in itinere occurrisset, tanta insolentia
a Diocletiano fertur exceptus, ut per aliquot passuum milia purpuratus
tradatur ad vehiculum cucurrisse. It is mentioned as an indignity inflicted
by Eastern kings in Plut. Lucull. 21.
viginti passuum milia: 20 Roman miles, the Roman mile being 1618
yds., or about 1 of an English mile; the passus was 4 ft. 101 in.
CHAPTER 7.
caede Gai: on Jan. 24, 41 A.D. the emperor Gaius (Caligula) was
assassinated by Cassius Chaerea and Cornelius Sabinus, tribunes of the
praetorian guards, in the vaulted corridor through which he was passing
from the Palace to see the Ludi Palatini (Calig. 58).
ad occasionem: sc. capiendi imperii. Becker proposed ad occasionem
<captandam >.
cohortem amicorum: = comites (Vesp. 4, 4, n.), the companions of the
emperor on a journey or campaign. Horace (Ep. i 3, 6, 8, 14) uses cohors
for the suite of Tiberius who was sent by Augustus to the East in 20 B.c.,
also (Sat. i 7, 23) for the staff of a commander or provincial governor (cf.
cohors praetoria, Cic. Verr. ii 1, 14). The poet Lucan was admitted to
Nero's cohors amicorum (Suet. vit. Lucani). Domitius, father of Nero,
was expelled by Caligula from his cohors amicorum for an outrage committed by him when a comes of Caligula on a journey to the East (Ner. 5).
At one of his pageants Caligula was attended by his cohors amicorum
driving in Gallic chariots (Calig. 19). The amici of the emperor were those
admitted to his receptions (salutationes, see on Vesp. 4, 4); from them
were chosen his judicial and administrative advisers (consilium) as well
as his comites. See also on Tit. 7, 2.
dignationis: dignatio (ἀξίωσις, ἀξίωμα) is used by Suetonius either
passively (as here, Dom. 2, 1 Vesp. 4, 3) or actively (Calig. 24, 3, reliquas
sorores nec cupiditate tanta, nec dignatione dilexit).
nec adeo: see on Oth. 5, 2.
expeditionis Britannicae: see on Vesp. 4, 1. The words of Suetonius
imply that Galba took part in the expedition, though there is no other
evidence of it.
Africam optinuit: his successful administration of Africa is mentioned in Plut. Galb. 3, λέγεται καὶ Λιβύης ἀνθύπατος (proconsul)
γενόμενος σὺν ὀλίγοις ἐπαινεθῆναι: cf. Tac. H. i 49, pro consule Africam
moderate, iam senior citeriorem Hispaniam pari iustitia continuit.
Vespasian and Vitellius also were proconsuls of Africa (Vesp. 4, 3;
Vitell. 5).
biennio: 45 and 46 A.D.; the normal tenure of the governorship of
senatorial provinces was for one year. Julius Caesar had fixed the period
in consular provinces as two years, in praetorian provinces as one (Cic.
Phil. i 8, 19). Augustus restored the period of one year (Suet. Aug. 47,
Dio liii 13, Tac. A. iii 58), but a special appointment like that of Galba
might be renewed for the following year (see Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 250 n.,
254 sq.). Dio (lx 25) mentions that Claudius allowed some of the proconsuls
to govern for two years: ἐπὶ δύο ἔτη τινὰς ἐῶν αὐτῶν ἄρχειν, αἱρετούς τε ἔστιν οὓς
πέμπων (αἱρετοí means extra sortem electi, opp. to κληρωτοί). For the tenure
of governorships in imperial provinces see on c. 9, 1.
extra sortem electus: the provinces of Africa and Asia were usually
assigned by lot to the senior consulares; see on c. 3, 4. Galba was specially
appointed to Africa by Claudius, just as the younger Pliny was specially
chosen by Trajan for the administration of Bithynia in 111 A.D. Tiberius
on an earlier occasion had nominated a proconsul for Africa on the outbreak of war with Tacfarinas in 21 A.D.; Tac. A. iii 35, Tiberius.. Manium
Lepidum et Iunium Blaesum nominavit, ex quis pro consule Africae
legeretur; Blaesus was appointed by the senate and continued in office for
a second year (ib. 58).
ordinandam: ordinare = turbatum ordinem restituere; cf. Iul. 40, 1,
ad ordinandum rei publicae statum: Aug. 13, 3, cum Antonius Orientem
ordinandum recepisset: Flor. ii 16: Plin. Ep. viii 24. See also on Vesp.
23, 2.
intestina dissensione: such conflicts as that described by Tacitus (H.
iv 50) between Oea (Tripoli) and Leptis in 70 A.D. See Mommsen, Prov.
Rom. Emp. (trans. Dickson) ii 316.
barbarorum tumultu: the Mussulamii, who earlier had carried on
warfare for eight years (17-24), were again defeated in the reign of
Claudius; cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 4, caesa Mussulamiorum manus. Other tribes
which constantly menaced the peace of the Roman province of Africa were
the Garamantes and Gaetuli (genus insuperabile bello, Verg. A. iv 40).
Augustus stationed a legion in Africa, and it was the only senatorial
province with an army. Caligula changed this by putting Numidia and the
Roman legion under an imperial legatus and confining the proconsul's
power to the civil administration of Africa Vetus. If Claudius adhered to
this arrangement, Galba when sent as proconsul to Africa must have been
specially empowered to take command of the army.
§ 2. artissima annona: for arta annona (arta “tight" in the sense of
"scarce'") cf. Tib. 8, cura
annonae, quae artior inciderat: Claud. 18, 2,
artiore annona ob assiduas sterilitates: Liv. xxvi 20; so arti commeatus,
Liv. ii 34: Tac. H. iv 26.
modium centum denariis vendidisse: the modius ( of a medimnus)
was nearly our “peck” (1 of a bushel); the denarius was worth about
9d. Similar avariciousness on the part of starving soldiers is described in
Luc. iv 93 sqq. (where Caesar's army surrounded by floods near Ilerda in
Spain was suffering from famine): iamque comes semper magnorum prima
malorum | saeva fames aderat: nulloque obsessus ab hoste | miles eget; toto
censu non prodigus emit | exiguam Cererem. Pro lucri pallida tabes! | non
deest prolato ieiunus venditor auro. A famous example of the same thing
was the sale of a mouse for 200 denarii during the siege of Casilinum (near
Capua) by Hannibal in 215 в.с.; Plin. N.H. viii 222, venisse murem ducentis
denariis, Casilinum obsidente Hannibale, eumque qui vendiderat fame interiisse, emptorem vixisse annales tradunt (cf. Val. Max. vii 6, 3;
Frontin. Strateg. iv 5, 20; Strab. v 248).
extabuit: cf. the iambic senarius quoted by Cicero (Tusc. iii 12):
Refugere oculi, corpus macie extabuit.
at: see on Vesp. 5, 5.
in iure dicendo: see on c. 9, 2, conventum agens.
proprietate: this seems to be the earliest instance of the use of proprietas in the sense of ownership" (dominium). In Cic. it means "id
quod proprium alicuius rei est," a peculiar property or special quality.
adaquari: adaquare (ποτίζειν) is a post-Aug. verb, used of watering
plants in Plin. N.H. xvii 63, etc. A deponent adaquari "to fetch water"
is given by the MSS. in Caes. B.C. i 66, but the reading is very doubtful,
as in six other passages in that work (and in Sall., Liv., etc.) the simple
aquari is the form used of soldiers getting water.
CHAPTER 8.
ornamenta triumphalia: see on Vesp. 4, 2.
sacerdotium triplex: Vitellius was honoured in the same way, Vitell. 5,
non solum honoribus verum et sacerdotiis amplissimis auctus; Vespasian
received a duplex sacerdotium in addition to the ornamenta triumphalia
for his services in Britain (Vesp. 4, 2).
quindecimviros: the care of the Sibylline books was originally entrusted
to duumviri under the kings; in 367 B.C. the number of priests was increased to 10, five patrician and five plebeian, later to 15 (quindecimviri
sacris faciundis) probably by Sulla; in addition to consulting the Sibylline
books as directed by the senate, they also had charge of the games of
Apollo (Liv. x 8) and the Secular games (Hor. C.S. 70, Tac. A. xi 11), and
as priests of Apollo each of them kept in his house a bronze tripod
dedicated to the god (Val. Fl. Arg. i 6).
sodales Titios: the origin of this ancient confraternity is obscure.
Tacitus (H. ii 95) says that Romulus founded it in honour of the Sabine
king Titus Tatius: Augustales,
quod sacerdotium, ut Romulus Tatio
regi, ita Caesar Tiberius Iuliae genti sacravit. In A. i 54 Tac. gives
another version: idem annus (14 A.D.) novas caerimonias accepit addito
sodalium Augustalium sacerdotio, ut quondam Titus Tatius retinendis
Sabinorum sacris sodales Titios instituit. The view that Tatius founded
this priesthood at Rome to preserve his native Sabine rites is supported
by Varr. L.L. v 85, sodales Titii dicti ab Titiis avibus, quas in auguriis
certis observare solent, the priests preserving the ancient Sabine auguries,
as distinct from those of other Italian peoples, when the Sabines as the
Tities or Titienses were united with the other two tribes, the Ramnes and
Luceres, under Romulus. Augustus revived this priesthood and invested
it with great dignity; in the Monum. Ancyr. (i 7) he mentions that he
was ἑταῖρος Τίτιος. Nero Caesar (son of Germanicus) and the emperor
Claudius were among the sodales Titii. See Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 446 sq.;
Daremberg-Saglio, v 347.
item: often used by Suetonius merely in the sense of et or etiam, and
in enumerations he has it alternating with et, e.g. Iul. 43, 1, lecticarum
usum item conchyliatae vestis et margaritarum
ademit: Aug. 4, 1,
superstitibus liberis Octavia maiore et Octavia minore item Augusto.
Augustales: a sacerdotium instituted by Tiberius for the worship of
Augustus and the Gens Iulia; see Tac. A. i 54, H. ii 95 (quoted above).
Originally there were 21 members “e primoribus civitatis" and Tiberius,
Drusus, Claudius, and Germanicus were added ‘“supra numerum” as honorary
members; afterwards the number rose to 28. When the cultus of Claudius
(after his deification) was added, they are called at times sodales Augustales
Claudiales. For similar priesthoods in honour of other emperors see note
on “collegium Flavialium,” Dom. 4, 4.
cooptatus: the great priestly bodies, such as the Augures and Pontifices,
at first filled vacancies in their number by cooptatio, but by the Lex Domitia
(103 в.с.) the comitia sacerdotum (17 out of the 35 tribes, chosen by lot)
were given the election from a list of nominees supplied by the colleges;
the candidates elected were then coopted by the colleges, this cooptatio,
though now a mere formality, being necessary to complete the election.
From the time of Tiberius these elections, like those of magistrates, were
transferred to the senate. In 29 B.C. Augustus was given the right of
choosing as many priests as he pleased even beyond the statutory number.
As a member of the various colleges the emperor had the right of nominatio,
and also exercised the right of commendatio which was tantamount to
appointment, the candidate recommended by the emperor being elected by
the senate and then coopted by the priestly bodies, e.g. Pliny was recommended by Trajan for the augurship (Plin. Εp. iv 8).
in secessu vixit: Vespasian passed a like period of retirement, through
fear of Agrippina, between his consulship (51 A.D.) and proconsulship
(63 A.D.); Vesp. 4, 2, medium tempus ad proconsulatum usque in otio
secessuque egit.
=
ne ad gestandum quidem: ne gestationis quidem causâ; for the
passive use of gestandum see on Dom. 11, 1, and for the gestatio see on
Vesp. 21.
umquam iter ingressus, quam ut efferret: it is perhaps possible
with Hofstee to defend the ellipse of aliter here by the ellipse of aliud
in Claud. 10, commilitones fluctuantes nec quicquam adhuc quam frementes.
Torrentius inserted aliter before iter, where it would easily have fallen
out; Casaubon would read aliter ingressus (omitting iter), and Lipsius
suggested aliter egressus (sc. domo).
decies: sc. centena milia, 1,000,000 sesterces, about £8,500.
in auro: for this use of in cf. Tib. 49, 2, quod partem rei familiaris
in pecunia haberent. In case of sudden flight Galba had provided himself
with 10,000 aurei (aureus = 100 sestertii, see on c. 20, 2).
Fundis: see on c. 4, 1.
Hispania Tarraconensis: under Augustus Spain was formed into three
provinces, Hispania Ulterior being divided into the two provinces of Baetica
and Lusitania, and Hispania Citerior receiving the name of Tarraconensis
from Tarraco (mod. Tarragona), which was made the capital instead of
New Carthage. Baetica was a senatorial province, Lusitania and Tarraconensis imperial provinces.
oblata est: Plutarch (Galb. 3) says that Nero anticipated no danger
to himself in appointing Galba to Spain: ἐπέμφθη δὲ ὑπὸ Νέρωνος Ιβηρίας
ἄρχων, οὔπω δεδιδαγμένου φοβεῖσθαι τοὺς ἐν ἀξιώμασι μεγάλους τῶν πολιτῶν. ἐκείνῳ
δὲ καὶ φύσει δοκοῦντι πράῳ γεγονέναι προσετίθει πίστιν εὐλαβείας τὸ γῆρας. Galba
was 65 years old when he received this appointment in 60 A.D.
§ 2. rerum mutationem: cf. Dom. 16, 1, n.
iuveni senem: Nero died in his 32nd year, and Galba succeeded him
in his 73rd. Dio (lxiv 1) mentions the same prodigy and gives the same
interpretation: παῖς λιβανωτὸν αὐτῷ θύοντι προσφέρων πολιὰς ἐξαίφνης ἔφυσεν, καὶ
οἱ μάντεις τὴν τοῦ νεωτέρου ἀρχὴν πρὸς τὸ γῆρας αὐτοῦ μεταστήσεσθαι ἔφησαν.
hoc est ipsum Neroni: Bentley suspected the genuineness of these
words; see on Vesp. 11, Dom. 17, 1.
Cantabriae: a mountainous district about midway on the N. coast of
Spain, forming part of the province of Tarraconensis.
lacum: Torrentius conjectured lucum; so, too, Bentley.
.
duodecim secures imperii signum: the duodecim lictores cum
fascibus were among the regia insignia marking the imperium of the old
Roman kings; cf. Cic. Rep. ii 17, 31, Liv. i 8, Dion. Hal. ii 29, iii 61, 62.
In later days these 12 lictors, bearing rods and axes, were granted to the
consuls and proconsuls, Augustus limiting the privilege to those proconsuls
who as ex-consuls governed the provinces of Asia and Africa (Mommsen,
Staatsr. i 382, ii³ 5). For the lictors who attended on the emperors themselves see on Dom. 14, 3.
CHAPTER 9.
octo annos: 60-68 A.D. The tenure of office by a legatus in an imperial
province depended on the emperor's pleasure (Dio liii 13, Tac. A. i 80);
Tiberius kept Sabinus as governor of Moesia for 24 yrs. and Silius as
governor of Upper Germany for 7 yrs. (Tac. A. vi 39, iv 18); Otho was
legatus in Lusitania for 10 yrs. (Suet. Oth. 3, 2). See Mommsen Staatsr. ii
259, Greenidge, Roman Public Life 434.
varie et inaequabiliter
rexit: Tacitus (H. i 49) praises Galba's
administration: pro consule Africam moderate, iam senior citeriorem
Hispaniam pari iustitia continuit. Plutarch (Galb. 4) says that Nero's
unscrupulous “receivers” (ἐπίτροποι, procuratores) harassed the provincials
in the most cruel manner; Galba could not assist them against the persecutors, but his concern for their misfortunes, a concern as great as if
he had been a sufferer himself, afforded them some consolation even while
they were condemned and sold as slaves. Lampooning verses were written
against Nero and sung everywhere; and as Galba did not try to suppress
them and did not share the resentment of the receivers of the revenue,
this endeared him still more to the natives.
primo acer: cf. the remark of Paetus Thrasea on Roman provincial
administration, Tac. A. xv 21, initia magistratuum nostrorum meliora ferme,
finis inclinat.
nummulario: a post-Aug. word for mensarius, argentarius, a money-changer or money-broker; cf. Petron. Satyr. 56, Mart. xii 57, 18; the
nummularius also conducted auctions and did banking business, e.g.
receiving deposits; cf. Ulp. Dig. xvi 3, 7, quotiens foro cedunt ("become
bankrupt'") nummularii, solet primo loco ratio haberi depositariorum, hoc
est eorum qui depositas pecunias habuerunt, non quas faenore apud nummularios vel cum nummulariis vel per ipsos exercebant.
ex fide: cf. Iul. 74, 2, quamvis omnia ex fide rettulissent; this use
of ex fide in the sense of cum fide is found in writers from Tacitus onwards.
versanti pecunias: “handling'" "dealing with" = tractanti; cf. Cic.
Div. in Caecil. 10, pecuniam publicam tu tractabas. Torrentius explains
versanti as contrectanti et exploranti, thus limiting it to the actual handling
and testing of the coins exchanged, such as is referred to in Aug. 4, 2;
Apul. Met. x 9, ne forte aliquis istorum quos offers aureorum nequam vel
adulter repperiatur nummulario praesente comprobentur. Casaubon
would omit pecunias or read in pecuniis.
manus amputavit: cf. Dom. 10, 5. Claudius on one occasion had this
punishment inflicted in court; Claud. 15, 2, proclamante quodam praecidendas falsario (“a forger," cf. Tit. 3, 2) manus, carnificem statim acciri
cum machaera mensaque lanonia flagitavit.
cui substitutus heres erat: substituere heredem (alicui) was a lega!
phrase for a testator naming a person as secundus heres in the event of
the primus heres refusing to accept the inheritance or dying before reaching
puberty; similarly a tertius heres could be named to succeed the secundus
in a like event: cf. Dig. xxviii 6, 1, Heredes aut instituti dicuntur aut
substituti: instituti primo gradu, substituti secundo vel tertio. Heredis
substitutio duplex est aut simplex, veluti: “Lucius Titius heres esto: si
mihi Lucius Titius heres non erit, tunc Seius heres mihi esto: si heres
non erit, sive erit et intra pubertatem decesserit, tunc Gaius Seius
heres mihi esto." Cf. Tib. 76, heredes aequis partibus reliquit Gaium et
Tiberium, substituitque invicem (i.e. should either die, the other was to
succeed): Quint. vii 6, 9, substitutus heres erat, si postumus ante tutelae
annos decessisset. To appoint the tutor of the primus heres as secundus
heres showed an implicit confidence on the part of the testator; Cicero
enjoyed such confidence, as he tells us in Fam. xiii '61: T. Pinnio familiarissime me usum esse scire te arbitror: quod quidem ille testamento declaravit,
qui me cum tutorem tum etiam secundum heredem instituit.
cruce adfecit: Cic. Verr. i 9, cum cives Romanos morte, cruciatu, cruce
adfecerit; so adficere exilio, verberibus, etc. More usual expressions for
crucifying are cruci figere (and compounds); cf. Dom. 10, 1, n.
imploranti leges: the laws invoked by Cicero in his passionate
denunciation of Verres for scourging and crucifying Gavius, a Roman
citizen, at Messana, Verr. v 63, O nomen dulce libertatis! O ius eximium
nostrae civitatis! O lex Porcia legesque Semproniae! The lex Porcia
(с. 197 в.с.) exacted penalties for scourging or killing a Roman citizen
(Liv. x 9); the lex Sempronia of Gaius Sempronius Gracchus (123 в.с.)
confirmed and widened the right of appeal (provocatio) for the condemned
man to the people (Cic. Rab. 12). Under the provisions of the lex Iulia
de vi (46 B.с.) Galba's victim was entitled to appeal to the emperor
against the sentence of the legatus; Paul. Sent. v 26, 1, lege Iulia de vi
publica damnatur qui aliqua potestate praeditus civem Romanum antea ad
populum, nunc ad imperatorem appellantem necarit necarive iusserit torserit
verberaverit condemnaverit inve publica vincula duci iusserit. See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 269.
civem Romanum se testificanti: cf. Cic. Verr. v 62, nulla vox alia illius
miseri inter dolorem crepitumque plagarum audiebatur nisi haec: “civis
Romanus sum." Asinius Pollio (Cic. Fam. x 32), describing how his
quaestor Balbus burned Fadius alive, says: et illi misero quiritanti
('crying out'"): “civis Romanus natus sum,” responderet “Abi nunc,
populi fidem implora." St. Paul used the plea of Roman citizenship to
escape scourging (Acts 22, 25).
•
quasi solacio iussit: Galba's response to the privilege claimed by
a Roman citizen was as contemptuous as that of Verres who ordered the
cross of Gavius to be set up facing the Straits of Messina, "ut ille quoniam
se civem Romanum esse diceret, ex cruce Italiam cernere ac domum suam
prospicere posset."
multo praeter ceteras altiorem: for the pleonasm cf. Vitell. 13, 1,
famosissima super ceteras: Dom. 12, 2, praeter ceteros acerbissime.
Bentley needlessly conjectured prae ceteris here.
in desidiam segnitiamque conversus est: cf. Tac. H. i 49 (of Galba),
sed claritas natalium et metus temporum obtentui, ut quod segnitia erat
sapientia vocaretur: Tac. Agr. 6 (of Agricola), mox inter quaesturam ac
tribunatum plebis atque ipsum etiam tribunatus annum quiete et otio
transiit, gnarus sub Nerone temporum, quibus inertia pro sapientia fuit:
Tac. Ann. xiv 47 (of Memmius Regulus in Nero's reign), vixit . quiete
defensus: Plin. Ep. viii 14, at nos iuvenes fuimus quidem in castris, sed
cum suspecta virtus, inertia in pretio.
ne quid materiae praeberet Neroni: sc. invidiae; cf. Cic. Phil. xi 9,
21, ut aut suspicioni crimen aut invidiae materiam dedisse videamur: Liv.
iii 46, non praebiturum se illi eo die materiam (seditionis): Suet. Aug. 16,
2, praebitam materiam exprobrandi: Claud. 4, 2, praebenda materia deridendi et illum et nos non est hominibus.
rationem otii reddere: referring to the famous maxim of Cato the
censor cited by Cicero, Planc. 27, 66, M. Catonis illud, quod in principio
scripsit Originum suarum, semper magnificum et praeclarum putavi,
clarorum virorum atque magnorum non minus otii quam negotii rationem
exstare oportere; cf. Colum. ii 22, tam otii quam negotii rationem reddere
oportere maiores nostri censuerunt: Justin (Hist. Philip. praef.), ut otii
mei, cuius et Cato reddendam putat, apud te ratio constaret.
§ 2. Carthagine nova: mod. Cartagena in Hispania Tarraconensis at
the S.E. extremity; founded by Hasdrubal in 242 B.c.; captured by Scipio
in 210; a Roman colony under the Empire with the title of Colonia Victrix
Iulia Nova Carthago.
conventum agens: for judicial purposes the province was divided into
districts called conventus iuridici, the courts being held in the chief town
of each district; "agere conventum" was the phrase for "to hold the
assizes" and the circuit judge was said “circumire conventus" (e.g. Iul.
7, 1, cum iure dicundo conventus circumiret). Pliny (N. H. iii 18) enumerates the 7 conventus of Tarraconensis as those of Carthago Nova,
Tarraco, Caesaraugusta, Clunia, Lucus Augusti, Bracara Augusta, Asturica
Augusta; these contained 472 towns and villages.
tumultuari Gallias: C. Julius Vindex, a descendant of a royal Celtic
family and governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, revolted against Nero in
68 A.D. As Lugdunum would take no part, Vienna on the Rhone was made
the centre of the rebellion. Some of the Gallic tribes, such as the Arverni,
Aedui, and Sequani, joined Vindex; but others, such as the Lingones,
Treviri, and generally all that "pars Galliarum quae Rhenum accolit”
(Tac. H. i 51) refused their aid. The revolt was crushed by the army
from Germany which remained loyal in spite of the solicitations of Vindex;
see on c. 11, 1.
Aquitaniae: see on c. 6, 1; its legatus would have no army under his
control. Tacitus (H. i 76) mentions Julius Cordus as governor of
Aquitania at the beginning of 69 A.D.
Vindicis litterae: Plutarch (Galb. 4) says that before the rebellion
broke out Galba had intimations of it in letters from Vindex; but he
neither countenanced it nor disclosed it to Nero as the governors of other
provinces did. After Vindex commenced hostilities he wrote to Galba
inviting him to accept the imperial dignity and to give a head to the
strong Gallic body which needed one (παρασχεῖν ἑαυτὸν ἰσχυρῷ σώματι
ζητοῦντι κεφαλήν); already there were 100,000 Gauls in arms, and further
forces could be raised. Dio (lxiii 23) gives a speech of Vindex to the
Gauls in which, after denouncing the villanies of Nero, he calls upon them
to rid the world of such a monster.
assertorem: "liberator"; cf. Iul. 80, 1, populo detrectante dominationem atque assertores flagitante: Ov. Rem. Am. 73, publicus assertor
dominis suppressa levabo | pectora; also used for "a champion of," e.g.
Tib. 2, 4, assertores unicos dignitatis ac potentiae patriciorum. See further
on "asserere,” Oth. 9,3, Vesp. 3; "assertio," Dom. 8,1. On some of the
coins of Galba are found the words salus gen. humani (Eckhel, vi 297;
Cohen, i² 334).
nec diu cunctatus: according to Plutarch (Galb. 4), he held a council
of his friends, and while some advised him to await developments, he was
influenced in his decision by the argument of T. Vinius, his lieutenant, who
pointed out that having once entertained the idea of revolt they were
already committed to it (cf. Tac. H. ii 77, nam qui deliberant, desciverunt).
condicionem recepit: recipere instead of the usual accipere is found
also in Vell. Pat. i 48, 5, condiciones pacis
recepit: Tac. A. ii 81, non
receptae condiciones.
mandata Neronis de nece sua: cf. Ner. 43, 1, Initio statim tumultus
(the revolt of Vindex and Galba) multa et immania, verum non abhorrentia
a natura sua creditur destinasse; successores percussoresque summittere
exercitus et provincias regentibus, quasi conspiratis idemque et unnım
sentientibus.
с, 9, 2-с. 10, 1.]
..
procuratores: Plutarch's description of the strained relations between
Galba and the procurators has been already referred to (see above, note on
"varie
rexit'"). In the senatorial provinces there were procurators to
look after the interests of the fiscus and the emperor's private affairs, but
it was in the imperial provinces (like Tarraconensis) that they held a most
important position independent of the governor, and often at variance
with him. In Britain the legatus Suetonius Paulinus was thwarted by the
procurator Classicianus, and the quarrel between them was so bitter that
Nero sent Polyclitus to compose it (Tac. A. xiv 38); the feeling of the
Britons under their oppressors is described in Tac. Agr. 15, binos reges
imponi, e quibus legatus in sanguinem, procurator in bona saeviret.
Agricola avoided such feuds when he was in Britain: ib. 9, procul a contentione adversus procuratores.
honestae: = honesto genere ortae (Vesp. 1, 3); so honeste natus (Aug.
43, 3).
Cluniae: a Celtiberian town, at this time the seat of a conventus
iuridicus in Tarraconensis (see above on “conventum agens''). After the
death of Vindex, Galba remained inactive at Clunia till news arrived that
he had been made emperor at Rome (see c. 11, 1); he continued to be a
patron of the town (C.I.L. ii 2339) and on coins of his reign Clunia bears
the additional name of Sulpicia (Eckhel, i 46, vi 294; Cohen, i² 324, 86).
fatidica puella: cf. Tac. H. iv 61, (Germani) plerasque feminarum
fatidicas arbitrantur; Cic. N.D. i 18, anus fatidica; Verg. Aen. viii 340,
vates fatidica.
carminum: oracula, sortes, and prophecies in general took the form of
verse; e.g. Liv. i 45, cecinere vates . fore ., idque carmen pervenerat ad
antistitem: Prop. iv 1, 51, Pergameae sero rata carmina vatis (i.e.
Cassandra). Cf. θεσπιῳδός, Carmenta, Camena.
oriturum ex Hispania principem: Galba, though merely a Roman
governor in Spain, took these prophecies as referring to himself; they were
more literally fulfilled when Spaniards by birth or descent, like Trajan,
Hadrian, and Theodosius, became emperors. Similarly the prophecies that
men from Judaea would rule the world were supposed to be fulfilled when
Vespasian, the Roman commander in Judaea, made himself emperor (see
Vesp. 4, 5).
CHAPTER 10.
manumissioni: Plut. Galb. 5, ἐκ τούτου προγράμματι ("by edict'')
μὲν ἐδήλωσεν ὁ Γάλβας ἡμέραν ἐν ᾗἢ τὰς κατὰ μέρος ἐλευθερώσεις ἀποδώσει τοῖς
δεομένοις. Galba chose the day on which in the normal course the
court would have requests for manumission to make public his intention of
"emancipating" the empire from the despotism of Nero. The usual
process of manumission was per vindictam, i.e. by the touch of the wand of
the lictor who acted as assertor libertatis, accompanied by the words
"Hunc ego hominem ex iure Quiritium liberum esse aio" and by the
master turning the slave round and releasing his hold on him. This proceeding required the presence of a consul, praetor, or provincial governor.
Pliny (Ep. vii 16) offers to get a friend of his, who is going to Baetica as
proconsul, to stop at Ticinum to perform the ceremony of manumission
(vindicta liberare). For other modes of manumission see on Vesp. 3, Latinae
condicionis.
vacaturus: vacare c. dat., used of a judge, meant that he was free to
hear certain cases on a certain day; cf. Plin. Ep. vii 33, cum explorasset
consules postulationibus vacaturos (“would be free to hear claims for restitution'"); so sedere c. dat. "to sit to hear certain cases," e.g. Ulp.
Dig. xxxviii 17, 2, 43, ubi primum potuit, id est, praetoris copiam habuit
huic rei sedentis.
proxima Baliari insula: i.e. Baliaris Maior. The Balearic islands
(Baliaris Maior and Minor, mod. Majorca and Minorca) are off the E. of
Spain; under the Empire they formed part of Hispania Tarraconensis and
belonged to the conventus of Carthago Nova (c. 9, 2); they served as one
of the places of exile for those banished by the Roman emperors (cf.
Tac. A. iv 42, xiii 43, and see note on Tit. 8, 5).
consalutatus imperator: Plutarch (Galb. 5) says that he was thus
saluted the moment he appeared on the tribunal: Οὐκ ἔφθη γοῦν φανερὸς ἐπὶ
τοῦ βήματος γενόμενος καὶ πάντες αὐτὸν ὁμοφώνως αὐτοκράτορα (imperatorem) προσεῖπον.
Ὁ δὲ ταύτην μὲν εὐθὺς οὐ προσεδέξατο τὴν προσηγορίαν, κατηγορήσας δὲ τοῦ
Νέρωνος καὶ τῶν ἀνῃρημένων (occisorum) ἀνδρῶν ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
ὀλοφυράμενος ὡμολόγησεν ἐπιδώσειν τῇ πατρίδι τὴν ἑαυτοῦ πρόνοιαν, οὔτε Καῖσαρ οὔτ᾽
αὐτοκράτωρ, στρατηγὸς δὲ συγκλήτου καὶ δήμου ῾Ρωμαίων (senatus populique R.)
ὀνομαζόμενος. Dio calculates the duration of Galba's reign from the day
(April 2, 68) on which he was thus acclaimed emperor in Spain (see
on c. 23 infr.); similarly Vespasian's reign was reckoned from the day
on which he was saluted as emperor by his soldiers (see Vesp. 6, 3).
On
imperator as a title of the princeps see Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 781.
Dio (lii 41) says of Augustus: καὶ τὴν τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος ἐπίκλησιν ἐπέθετο.
λέγω δὲ οὐ τὴν ἐπὶ ταῖς νίκαις κατὰ τὸ ἀρχαῖον διδομένην τισίν (see on Tit. 5, 2)...
ἀλλὰ τὴν ἑτέραν τὴν τὸ κράτος διασημαίνουσαν, ὥσπερ τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ τῷ Καίσαρι..
ἐψήφιστο.
..
legatum se senatus professus est: thus renouncing his allegiance
to Nero who had appointed him as legatus Augusti pro praetore in the
imperial province of Tarraconensis. A similar recognition of the supreme
authority of "the senate and the Roman people" was professed by
Verginius Rufus who crushed the revolt of Vindex (c. 9, 2, Dio lxiii 25)
and by Clodius Macer in Africa (see c. 11 infr.). Mommsen (Hermes xiii
90 sqq.) argues that a return to a senatorial or republican government was
seriously contemplated at this period. The exultation of the senate in its
brief freedom after Nero's death finds expression on the coins it issued
inscribed with Libertas P.R., Libertas restituta or renascens, Roma
renascens, Mars or Hercules Adsertor, etc. (Eckhel vi 293 sqq.). See Schiller,
Geschichte der röm. Kaiserzeit i 366.
§ 2. iustitio indicto: a iustitium (= iuris quasi interstitio quaedam et
cessatio, Gell. xx 1) was a suspension of legal and other business at Rome
on occasions of national danger; it was proclaimed (indicere, Calig. 24, 2,
Liv. ix 7; edicere, Liv. iii 27) by a dictator, consul, or praetor; under the
Empire we find a iustitium ordered on account of religious festivals, a
famine, a funus publicum, and (most frequently) the death of a member
of the imperial house.
..
..
e plebe legiones conscripsit: legiones may be a mistake or a
corruption (as Heraeus, on Tac. H. i 6, suggests) for legionem, as there
is no evidence that Galba enrolled from his province more than the one
legion, viz. vii Galbiana, which is mentioned by Tacitus (e.g. H. iii 25,
Iulius Mansuetus ex Hispania inter septimanos a Galba conscriptus). The
theory of Grotefend that Legio prima Adiutrix (see on c. 12, 2) was enrolled
by Galba and not by Nero is rightly rejected by Mommsen (C.I.L. iii
p. 907); see also Ritterling in Pauly-Wissowa xii 1380 sqq., Parker Roman
Legions 99 sq.
auxilia: in the Roman army “auxilia” were auxiliaries from the provinces (also, at times, from allied states and princes, and even from
independent nations), corresponding in number approximately with the
legionaries; cf. Tib. 16, bellum . per quindecim legiones paremque auxiliorum copiam gessit: Tac. A. iv 5.
exercitum veterem: under Augustus and Tiberius there were three
legions quartered in Spain: iv Macedonica, vi Victrix, x Gemina; Galba
as legatus of Hispania Tarraconensis had one legion, vi Victrix (Tac. H.
i 16, v 16), by which he was proclaimed emperor.
alarum: auxiliary cavalry, divided into alae miliariae of 960 men each
(24 turmae of 40 each) and alae quingenariae of 480 (16 turmae of 30).
cohortium: these are cohortes auxiliariae, sociae, and might be infantry
(cohortes peditatae) or include a certain proportion of cavalry (cohortes
equitatae); the cohors miliaria equitata had 240 cavalry and 760 infantry,
the cohors quingenaria equitata had 120 cavalry and 360-380 infantry.
Sometimes these cohortes were equipped with their native weapons, and are
described as sagittarii, funditores, contarii, cataphracti, etc. See Marquardt,
Staatsv. ii² 468 sqq.
velut instar senatus: i.e. a copy of the Roman senate whose legatus
and champion he now professed to be. For the uses of instar in Suet. see
on Vesp. 5, 2. The MSS. vary between velut (read by Preud'homme) and
vel (read by Ihm); velut is supported by the equally pleonastic use of
quasi in Cic. Tusc. i 17, 40, terra ad universi caeli complexum quasi puncti
instar obtinet.
quotiens opus esset: Suetonius uses quotiens more often than any
other particle in introducing iterative clauses; it occurs 30 times in the
Lives, 29 times with the subjunctive (imperf. or pluperf.) and once (Aug.
88) with pres. indicative. In class. Lat. quotiens takes the indic.; post-Aug. writers frequently use the subjunct. (Draeger, ii² 584). Suetonius
also uses quotiensque (not quotienscunque): Aug. 37, quotiensque opus
esset: Calig. 7, quotiensque introiret. (Düpow, De Suet. consuetudine
sermonis 19 sq.)
$ 3. manente anulorum aureorum usu: i.e. without sacrificing their
rank as equites; an eques who became a centurion in a legion lost his rank
as eques (see Mommsen Staatsr. iii³ 504 n. where our passage is cited).
The gold ring had come to be a badge of the equestrian order (cf. Iul. 33;
39, 2; Galb. 14, 2; Vitell. 12). Originally it was given at public expense
(de publico) to those senators who were sent as ambassadors (legati):
then it came to be worn by the nobiles, by the equites equo publico, and
later by all the knights. The gift of the anulus aureus, e.g. by Sulla to
the actor Roscius, conferred equestrian status. Under the early Empire
it was freely bestowed; so many wealthy freedmen obtained it that in
23 A.D. a decree of the senate was passed: “ne cui ius anulorum esset nisi
cui ingenuo ipsi, patri avoque paterno sestertia cccc census fuisset" (Plin.
N.H. xxxiii 8; cf. Daremberg-Saglio, i 296 sqq.). Six months' service as
tribunus legionis carried with it the rank of eques and the ius anuli aurei
(Juv. vii 88, with Mayor's note).
evocati: Galba gave to this special bodyguard the title of "evocati”
or volunteer veterans (see on Vesp. 1, 2) because the evocati in the Roman
army formed at times the personal guard (cohors praetoria, Cic. Fam. x 30)
of the general, as in the case of the evocati of Octavian before the battle
of Mutina (Appian Bell. Civ. iii 40); sometimes this personal guard was
composed of Roman equites (Polyb. vi 31, 2).
excubias agerent: they were to act as excubitores, a name specially
given to the cohort of praetorians which guarded the emperor in his
palace and accompanied him to entertainments at other houses (cf. Oth.
4,2; 6, 1; Ner. 8; 21, 1; Tac. 4. xii 69, H. i 29; 38); their officer
(tribunus excubitor) received the password (tessera) from the emperor
(Calig. 56, 2; Claud. 42, 1; Ner. 9; Tac. A. i 7, xiii 3).
per provincias: Otho, in Lusitania, was the first of the provincial
governors to declare for Galba (Oth. 4, 1; Plut. Galb. 20); then all the
others, except Clodius Macer in Africa and Verginius Rufus in Germany,
sided with him (Plut. c. 6). A coin of Galba's bears the words concordia
provinciarum (Eckhel, vi p. 293).
auctor conspirandi et ut.. iuvarent: for a similar change of
construction cf. Iul. 88, placuit Idus Martias Parricidium nominari, ac ne
umquam eo die senatus ageretur. Such changes are common in poetry and
are found at times in Cicero, e.g. Deiot. 10, quibus ille studiis se imbuerat, non saltandi, sed bene ut armis, optime ut equis uteretur.
singulis: in all the MSS. except IQ the reading is in singulis which
is adopted by Ihm but not by Preud'homme, Roth, or the early editors.
communem causam = causam rei publicae.
§ 4. oppidi: its name is unknown; Galba made it the headquarters for
the assembly of men and munitions for the campaign, and fortified it in
case of attack.
sedem bello: cf. Tac. H. i 65, where Vienna (in Gallia Narbonensis)
is spoken of as "sedes Gallici belli."
scalptura exprimente: the wonderful skill of ancient lapidaries
(gemmarii scalptores) enabled them to depict a great variety of designs
on signet rings; Pompey's ring, like the ring mentioned here, represented.
three trophies (Dio xlii 18); the seal of Galba's family was a dog looking
from the prow of a ship (Dio li 3); Pliny (N.H. xxxvii 8, 10) tells us that
the gem on Sulla's ring showed the surrender of Jugurtha, and that
Augustus had as a signet first the figure of a Sphinx, later a portrait of
Alexander the Great, and finally a faithful likeness of himself which subsequent emperors also used. Cf. Aug. 50.
navis: Dio (lxiv 1) says that there were more than one of these
miraculous ships: καὶ πλοῖα ὅπλων μεστὰ πρὸς Ἰβηρίαν
ἀνθρώπων ἄγοντος αὐτά, προσωρμίσθη.
αὐτόματα, μηδενὸς
Dertosam: in Hispania Tarraconensis, on the left bank of the Hiberus
(Ebro) and near its mouth; mod. Tortosa. Livy (xxiii 28) calls it "Hibera
urbs"; Strabo (iii 160, 195) mentions it as a Roman colony. Some of
the coins of Dertosa show the figure of a ship, it being an important
trading port. See Pauly-Wissowa, v 246 sq.
..
cum repente turbata sunt: for this use of “cum inversum” (= tum,
a relative form of proposition being substituted for a demonstrative) see
Draeger, ii² 569; it is used principally by the historians to introduce something unexpected and surprising; Cicero also is fond of it, e.g. Verr. 2, 29,
non dubitabat Minucius quin iste quaesiturus non esset, cum repente
iubetur dicere: Sest. 37, 79, venit
obnuntiavit consuli, cum subito
manus illa Clodiana exclamat.
§ 5. alarum: see c. 10, 2.
paene interemerunt, nisi
esset: for paene with perf. ind. in the
..
apodosis of an unreal condition in past time, cf. Iul. 52, 1, paene
Aegyptum penetravit, nisi exercitus sequi recusasset: Plaut. Pers. 594,
paene in foveam decidi, ni hic adesses: Cic. Att. xv 26, 4, paene fecit,
nisi tua malitia adfuisset: Liv. ii 10, 2, pons sublicius iter paene hostibus
dedit, ni unus vir fuisset, Horatius Cocles. See Kühner-Stegmann, i 171,
174.
cohortantibus: the pres. ptc. is here used in a perf. or aorist sense;
see on c. 5, 2.
CHAPTER 11.
mors Vindicis: Vindex (c. 9, 2) was defeated at Vesontio (Besançon)
in Gallia Belgica by Verginius Rufus, the legatus of Upper Germany
(Тас. Н. і, 51, iv 57); it is doubtful whether he was slain ("caeso cum
omnibus copiis Vindice," Tac.) or committed suicide (Plut. Galb. 6, and
Dio lxiii 24). The victorious legions offered the empire to Rufus but he
declined it and in his epitaph which he wrote he prides himself on his
refusal: "Hic situs est Rufus pulso qui Vindice quondam | imperium
asseruit non sibi sed patriae" (Plin. Ep. vi 10). Juvenal (viii 221) says
that of all the crimes of which Nero was guilty his poetic and musical
efforts called most for the vengeance of Verginius, Vindex, and Galba:
Quid enim Verginius armis | debuit ulcisci magis aut cum Vindice Galba
quod Nero tam saeva crudaque tyrannide fecit?
consternatus: Plutarch (Galb. 6) describes the panic of Galba and his
subsequent inactivity at Clunia: τότε δὴ περίφοβος γενόμενος ὁ Γάλβας ἔγραψε
τῷ Οὐεργινίῳ παρακαλῶν κοινοπραγεῖν καὶ διαφυλάσσειν ἅμα τὴν ἡγεμονίαν καὶ τὴν
ἐλευθερίαν τοῖς ῾Ρωμαίοις· αὖθις δὲ μετὰ τῶν φίλων εἰς Κλουνίαν, Ἰβηρικὴν πόλιν,
ἀναχωρήσας ἐν τῷ μετανοεῖν περὶ τῶν γεγονότων καὶ ποθεῖν τὴν συνήθη καὶ σύντροφον
απραγμοσύνην μᾶλλον ἢ πράττειν τι τῶν ἀναγκαίων διέτριβεν.
vitae renuntiaret: in Cic. renuntiare in the sense of cancelling an
agreement or breaking off relations usually takes the acc. of the thing
cancelled and the dat. of the person notified, e.g. Verr. 2, 2, 89, incensus
hospitium ei renuntiat (so amicitiam alicui renuntiare, Suet. Calig. 2, 3,
Liv., Tac., etc.): Verr. 2, 1, 141, renuntiat Habonius illam decisionem
tutoribus told the guardians the offer was withdrawn"; in post-Aug.
Lat. the dat. is used of the thing abandoned as though it were a person
receiving notice (see Summers on Sen. Ep. 108, 15, inde ostreis boletisque
in omnem vitam renuntiatum est), so we find such phrases as renuntiare
civilibus officiis (Plin. Ep. ii 1, Quint. x 7), foro (Suet. Rhet. 6), inertiae
(Plin. Pan. 59, 2), Naturae (Sen. Prov. 6, 8).
nuntiis: according to Plutarch (Galb. 7) it was Icelus, a freedman of
Galba, who first brought the news of Nero's death and Galba's appointment (see c. 22 infr.); two days later Titus Vinius and others brought
full details.
occisum Neronem: for Nero's death see on Dom. 11, 2, more maiorum
puniendi.
in verba sua iurasse: cf. c. 16, 1; Oth. 8, 1; Vitell. 15, 1; Tac. A. i 7,
consules primi in verba Tiberii Caesaris iuravere, apudque eos Seius Strabo
et C. Turranius, ille praetoriarum cohortium praefectus, hic annonae; mox
senatus milesque et populus. So also in nomen principis iurare'” (Claud.
10, 4, etc.). This oath taken by the whole people and provinces was a
recognition of Caesar's sole proconsulare imperium (Furneaux on Tac. l.c.),
and was an extension of the old military oath (sacramentum) by which
the soldier was said “iurare in verba consulum, etc." The oath of fealty
to the emperor was taken afresh every New Year's day (cf. c. 16. 2) and
on the anniversary of the day on which it had first been taken (Plin. Ep. x
52; Tac. A. i 8, H. i 55). See Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 792 sq.
Caesaris appellationem: cf. Dio ap. Zonar. xi 14, Γάλβας δ', ἐπεὶ ὁ Νέρων
διέφθαρτο καὶ ἡ βουλὴ τὴν ἀρχήν οἱ ἐψηφίσατο καὶ ὁ ῾Ῥοῦφος αὐτῷ προσεχώρησεν,
ἀνεθάρσησεν, οὐ μέντοι καὶ τὸ Καίσαρος ἀνέλαβεν ὄνομα πρὶν τοὺς τῆς βουλῆς
πρεσβευτὰς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος (imperatoris) πρότερον
εἰς οὐδὲν γράμμα ἐνεγεγράφει. “Caesar” is now adopted as a mere title for
the Roman emperor since "progenies Caesarum in Nerone defecit” (Galb. 1).
See further on Dom. 1, 3.
iter ingressus est: Galba left Hispania Tarraconensis in June 68 A.D.
and did not reach Rome till September (Tac. H. i 6, tardum iter Galbae).
paludatus: wearing the paludamentum or general's cloak, usually of
purple or scarlet (cf. Vitell. 11, 1, n.).
Under the Empire, when the
military imperium was concentrated in the emperor, the paludamentum became one of the insignia of his power. Mommsen, Staatsr. i³ 432.
..
dependente pugione: the dagger of military officers was worn either
on a bandolier round the neck or on a girdle by the side (Mommsen, i³
p. 434, n. 1); the pugio (less frequently called gladius, ξίφος) was an
emblem of the proconsular power of the princeps, the assumption of
empire being described as the taking of the dagger in the hand, and the
surrender of the empire as the giving back of the dagger; cf. Vitell. 8, 1;
15, 4; Tac. H. iii 68 (of Vitellius' abdication) adsistenti consuli
exsolutum a latere pugionem velut ius necis vitaeque civium reddebat:
Sen. Clem. i 11, 3 (of Nero), nulli umquam citius gladius commissus est.
The right of wearing the pugio as a symbol of military command was
granted by the emperor, especially to the praefectus praetorio who is
often described as the bearer and custodian of the imperial dagger, e.g.
Aurel. Vict. Caes. 13, 9 (of Trajan appointing Suburanus as praefectus
praetorio), cum insigne potestatis, uti mos erat, pugionem daret; cf. Plin.
Pan. 67, Plut. Galb. 8, Philostr. Apoll. iv 42, viii 16, Lamprid. Comm. 6,
tunc primum tres praefecti praetorio fuere, inter quos libertinus, qui a
pugione appellatus est. Dio (Xiph.), lxiv 3, says that the wearing of a
"large sword" by Galba (a feeble old man of 73) on his march from
Spain excited great ridicule : ὅτι δὲ ξίφος μέγα διὰ πάσης τῆς ὁδοῦ ἐξηρτᾶτο, καὶ
γέρων καὶ ἀσθενὴς τὰ νεῦρα ὤν, καὶ πάνυ πολὺν γέλωτα ὠφλίσκανε.
..
prius quam oppressis: Suetonius in his fondness for participial constructions sometimes uses prius .. quam and ante.. quam in neg. sentences
(1) with the ptc., e.g. Vesp. 6, 1, nec.. ante temptavit
quam sollicitatus:
Vesp. 15: Iul. 58, 2: Aug. 53, 3: Calig. 27, 4: (so in Cic. Phil. i 25,
Tusc. i 13, Fin. i 49, N.D. i 68, Liv. vii 35, etc.); (2) with the ptc. in
the abl. abs., as here: Vitell. 8, 2, nec ante
rediit quam flagrante
triclinio: Tib. 22 and 37, 3: (earlier in Livy, e.g. xxiv 18, non ante quam
bello confecto: Plin. N.H. viii 144).
usum togae reciperavit: this use of reciperare in the sense of repetere
"to resume" does not seem to occur earlier.
Nymphidio Sabino: son of Nymphidia, a freedwoman, and Martianus,
a gladiator (Plut. Galb. 9); though he himself alleged that he was a son
of Caligula (Tac. A. xv 72). He was made praefectus praetorio by Nero
in 65 after the conspiracy of Piso. When Nero's affairs were in a desperate
state, Nymphidius persuaded the praetorian guards to declare Galba emperor,
hoping to exercise the real authority himself; but finding that Galba preferred his own officers Vinius and Laco (who was appointed praefectus
praetorio in his stead), he tried to induce the praetorians to proclaim him
as emperor; they refused, and when he tried to force an entrance to their
camp he was slain by them (Tac. H. i 5, 25, 37).
Fonteio Capitone: consul in 67, legatus of Lower Germany in 68;
according to Plutarch (Galb. 13) and Suetonius he entertained treasonable
designs against Galba who had him put to death, but from the account
in Tac. H. i 7 it appears that his guilt was doubtful: Forte congruerat ut
Clodii Macri et Fontei Capitonis caedes nuntiarentur. Macrum in Africa
haud dubie turbantem Trebonius Garutianus procurator iussu Galbae,
Capitonem in Germania, cum similia coeptaret, Cornelius Aquinus et
Fabius Valens legati legionum interfecerant, antequam iuberentur. Fuere
qui crederent Capitonem ut avaritia et libidine foedum ac maculosum, ita
cogitatione rerum novarum abstinuisse; sed a legatis bellum suadentibus
postquam impellere nequiverint, crimen ac dolum ultro compositum; et
Galbam mobilitate ingenii, an ne altius scrutaretur, quoquo modo acta,
quia mutari non poterant, comprobasse. Tacitus also mentions (i 58) that
when Vitellius became emperor, Capito's soldiers, who held his memory
dear, demanded the death of his accuser. Dio (lxiv 2) says that Nymphidius
and Capito were so wantonly arrogant that on one occasion when an accused
person appealed from Capito to Caesar, Capito at once leaped into a
higher chair and invited him to plead his cause before Caesar, and having
heard his appeal put him to death.
Clodio Macro: appointed legatus of Africa by Nero and guilty of
much extortion and bloodshed as governor. On Nero's death he revolted
and laid claim to the throne, being instigated by Crispinilla (magistra
libidinum Neronis, Tac. H. i 73) who crossed to Africa and advised him
to starve Rome by cutting off the African corn supply. He aimed at
restoring the Republic, and on coins which he had struck he put his own
image and the inscription s(enatus) c(onsulto) pro praetore Africae, instead
of leg. Aug. pr. pr. prov. Africae (Eckhel vi p. 289, Cohen i² p. 316). He
also enrolled a new legion in Africa which he called “Legio I Liberatrix
Macriana." When Galba had secured the empire, he caused Macer to be
put to death by the procurator Trebonius Garutianus (Tac. H. i 7, 37, 73;
ii 97; Plut. Galb. 6, 15). The legio Macriana was disbanded by Galba
but was again pressed into service by Vitellius and finally disappeared
on his death (Parker, Rom. Legions 106).
CHAPTER 12.
saevitiae atque avaritiae: vices masquerading under the guise of
severitas and parsimonia, according to Otho in his speech denouncing Galba
to the soldiers, Tac. H. i 37: quae usquam provincia, quae castra sunt
nisi cruenta et maculata aut, ut ipse (Galba) praedicat, emendata et
correcta? nam quae alii scelera hic remedia vocat, dum falsis nominibus
severitatem pro saevitia, parsimoniam pro avaritia, supplicia et contumelias
vestras disciplinam appellat. The "saevitia Galbae” is mentioned also in
Тас. Н. і 87; cf. Oros. vii 8, 1, cumque omnes avaritia saevitia segnitiaque
offenderet.
civitates Hispaniarum Galliarumque punisset: we have no details
of the particular Spanish civitates which were treated vindictively by
Galba, but he punished those cities and communities in Gaul (such as
Lugdunum, the Treveri and the Lingones) which had remained loyal to
Nero during the revolt of Vindex (c. 9, 2), and he rewarded those which
had supported that abortive rising (such as Vienna, the Sequani, Aedui,
and Arverni); cf. Tac. H. i 65, Galba reditus (“revenues'') Lugdunensium
occasione irae in fiscum verterat; multus contra in Viennenses honor: i 53,
Treveri ac Lingones quasque alias civitates atrocibus edictis aut damno
finium Galba perculerat. The plurals Hispaniae and Galliae denote the
various provinces mentioned in the notes on c. 8, 1 (‘‘Hispania Tarraconensis'') and c. 6, 1 (“Aquitania’”).
sibi: for the use of the reflexive see on Vesp. 15, 1, qui se
salutaverat.
murorum destructione: cf. Liv. viii 14, in Veliternos, quod totiens rebellassent, graviter saevitum; et muri deiecti, etc. The subst. destructio
occurs first in Quintilian (x, 5, 12) as a rhetorical term, sententiarum
destructio (= ἀνασκευή, refutatio; opp. to confirmatio, κατασκευή.)
praepositos: a vague title which has been variously interpreted. Ernesti
and Bremi explain it of the provincial governors put to death by Galba,
such as Clodius Macer in Africa and Fonteius Capito in Germany (c. 11),
but Suetonius is speaking of executions connected with Spain and Gaul.
Stahr takes it as higher officials, and La Harpe as Gallic and Spanish
chieftains. Baumg.-Crus. is probably right in understanding by it "militiae
praefecti (so Hofstee “duces militares"), as the word is used for
military officers in c. 16, 1: Oth. 1, 2: Tac. H. i 36, etc. Tacitus (H. i 37)
mentions Obultronius Sabinus and Cornelius Marcellus as slain by Galba
in Spain, and Betuus Chilo as slain in Gaul, but does not state what
positions they held there; again (H. i 6) he says: tardum Galbae iter et
cruentum interfectis Cingonio Varrone consule designato et Petronio
Turpiliano consulari: ille ut Nymphidii (see Galb. 11, n.) socius, hic ut
dux Neronis, where Ritter takes "dux Neronis" to mean that Turpilianus
was selected by Nero to command against Vindex and Galba.
procuratores: for these and their hostility to Galba see on c. 9, 2.
Tarraconensibus: the citizens of Tarraco, the capital of Hispania
Tarraconensis (c. 8, 1).
confiasset: ''melted down" to coin into money; cf. Aug. 52, argenteas
statuas conflavit exque iis (i.e. with the money coined from them)
aureas cortinas ("tripods'') Apollini Palatino dedicavit. Suetonius also
uses conftare in the fig. sense, Ner. 36, 1, coniuratio Beneventi conflata.
§2. classiarios: the classiarii or classici were the marines (ἐπιβάται),
either libertini or peregrini, thousands of whom had been brought by Nero
to Rome to support his waning power. Much controversy has arisen with
regard to the formation of the first legion of classiarii and whether the
classiarii mentioned here as so severely dealt with by Galba were those
already formed into that legion; the accounts given by Tacitus, Suetonius,
Plutarch, and Dio being difficult to reconcile. Heraeus and Spooner on
Tac. H. i 6 hold that Nero had formed the best of the classiarii into a
legion "prima Adiutrix classicorum” (cf. Tac. i 31, 36: ii 43, 67: iii 44:
Dio, lv 24, says that Galba created this legion); the rest wished to be
regularised in the same way as legionaries; Galba did not interfere with
Nero's legio classica, but dealt drastically with the other classiarii who
came out to claim similar privileges; his slaughter of them alienated the
legio classica, which consequently supported Otho against him, Tac. i 31,
legioni classicae diffidebatur infestae ob caedem commilitonum, quos primo
statim introitu trucidaverat Galba: i 36, universa classicorum legio sacramentum eius (i.e. Otho) accepit; Otho on his accession released the classiarii
who had escaped the slaughter, and had been imprisoned by Galba; he
gave them the organisation of a legion and held out hopes of a more
honourable service (i.e. in the legions) to other classiarii for the future,
thus securing the loyalty of the fleet (Tac. i 87). If Tacitus were our
only authority, these are certainly the most natural conclusions to draw
from his statements. On the other hand, Suetonius here seems to agree
with Plutarch (Galb. 15) who says that those who met Galba with their
demands were the ἐρέται (remiges or classiarii) whom Nero had formed
into a legion and declared to be legionary soldiers (οὺς εἰς ἓν τάγμα ὁ Νέρων
συλλοχίσας ἀπέφηνε στρατιώτας), and most modern writers accept this as
correct, assuming that the legion had not been fully organised at the time
of Nero's death and had not yet received its aquila and signa. (See
Dessau, Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit ii 1, 307; Ritterling in Pauly-Wissowa xii
1382; Parker, Rom. Legions 100.) Dio, lxiv 3, erroneously states that it
was the bodyguard (δορυφόροι, praetoriani) of Nero who met Galba and
claimed to be kept on in the same service.
cum redire ad pristinum statum cogeret: Suetonius is alone in stating
that Galba had already ordered them to resume their former position and
that they had refused. Plutarch says that when they made their demand
Galba was for postponing the matter, and that they, taking this postponement as a refusal, followed him with shouts and some of them even drew
their swords; whereupon he ordered the cavalry to charge. Dio agrees
with Plutarch.
aquilam et signa: Marius made the aquila the standard of the legion;
the 30 signa were the ensigns of the legionary maniples (the maniple consisting of two centuries). In form, a signum was a silver-plated pole
with a cross-bar near the top; below the bar were silver discs (phalerae)
along the pole, and from the bar hung ribands, often with silver ornaments
at their ends. The aquila was generally made of silver, sometimes of gold
(Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 438).
inmisso equite disiecit : so Plut., ἐκέλευσε τοὺς ἱππεῖς ἐμβαλεῖν αὐτοῖς.
Dio says that Galba attacked them with his army: ἐφῆκέ (inmisit) σφισι
τὸ στράτευμα. This happened at the Pons Mulvius, on the Tiber two
miles above Rome (Tac. H. i 87). Dio asserts that 7000 were slain, and
Tacitus (i 6) talks of many thousands: introitus in urbem trucidatis tot
milibus inermium militum infaustus omine atque ipsis etiam qui occiderant
formidolosus. Plutarch says that some were knocked down immediately
and others were cut down as they fled, and that it was a bad omen for
Galba that his entry into Rome should be through streams of blood and
over heaps of corpses. Any previous contempt for his age and weakness
was now changed into a universal horror and apprehension (πᾶσι φρικώδης
καὶ φοβερὸς ἐγένετο.)
decimavit: cf. Tac. i 37, where Otho says: Horror animum subit,
quotiens recordor feralem introitum et hanc solam Galbae victoriam, cum
in oculis urbis decumari deditos iuberet, quos deprecantes in fidem acceperat.
Polybius (vi 38) describes decimatio (δεκάτευσις), which was the penalty
when whole companies had failed in their duty. The tribune assembles
the legion, calls the defaulters to the front and after severely censuring
them selects about a tenth of them by lot. Those selected are punished
without mercy either by the fustuarium or by military execution; the
rest are put on rations of barley instead of wheat and quartered outside
the protection of the vallum. Appius Claudius thus dealt with his mutinous
army in 471 в.с. (Liv. ii 59); decimatio was also used by Crassus (Plut.
Crass. 10), Caesar (Dio xli 35), Octavian (Suet. Aug. 24, 2; Dio xlix 38),
etc.
Germanorum cohortem: Augustus at first had a bodyguard of
Calagurritani from Hispania Tarraconensis until he had defeated
M. Antonius, and then of Germans (prob. Batavi, cf. Dio lv 24) until the
clades Variana in 10 A.D. when Varus lost his legions in the Saltus
Teutoburgiensis and was himself slain (Aug. 49). The German bodyguard
was restored by Tiberius (Tac. A. i 24); Caligula also had Germans (Batavi)
as "corporis custodes," and they slew several of his assassins (Calig. 43;
58, 3). From numerous inscriptions (C.I.L. vi 4337-4345, 4716, 8802-8812)
we see that the bodyguards of Tiberius, Claudius, and Nero were drawn
from various German tribes subject to Rome, the Batavi, Frisii, Ubii, Suebi,
etc. They were legally slaves and not organised as soldiers into centuriae
or turmae but as a collegium divided into decuriae (Marquardt, Staatsv. ii
471; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 808). The dismissal of the Germans by Galba
seems to have been final, as they are not mentioned later. Julius Caesar
had a bodyguard of Spaniards which he had dispensed with before his
assassination (Iul. 86); M. Antonius was guarded by Ityraeans (Cic. Phil.
ii 112).
=
multis experimentis fidelissimam :
quae saepe se fidelissimam probaverat; cf. Sall. Iug. 46, sed Metello iam antea experimentis cognitum
erat genus Numidarum infidum.
sine commodo ullo: commodum was the regular word for the "bounty"
of money or land granted to time-expired soldiers (veterani, emeriti) on
their discharge (missio); Aug. 24, 2; 49, 2: Calig. 44, 1: Ner. 32, 1:
Vitell. 15, 1, n.: Cic. Phil. v 53, etc.
Cn. Dolabellae: probably a son of P. Dolabella (cons. 10 A.D.); his
wife Petronia had been earlier wedded to Vitellius before he became
emperor (Vitell. 6, Tac. H. ii 64); he was a relative of Galba (Tac. H. і 88),
and when Galba at the beginning of 69 was thinking of adopting a
successor, some of his friends recommended Dolabella (Plut. Galb. 23);
Otho banished him to Aquinum (Tac. l.c., Plut. Oth. 5); on Otho's death
(Apr. 69) he returned to Rome, but was put to death by Vitellius on a
charge of tampering with the troops (Tac. H. ii '63).
hortos: the horti Dolabellae, according to Gilbert (Topogr. Rom iii
377), extended from the Mons Pincius to the Campus Agrippae in which
was the castra of the cohors Germanorum. The Mons Pincius was known
as the Collis hortorum; on it, or close to it, were the horti Sallustii, Variani,
Lucullani, etc.
tendebat: tendere properly meant to stretch tents (tentoria)," and
then was used in the general sense "to be quartered or stationed,"
whether the troops were under canvas or in buildings; cf. c. 19, 1; Tac.
H. i 31, 55, 59: ii 66, etc.
..
§3. verene an falso: see note on Oth. 1, 1, incertum an ingenua.
ordinario: a “servus ordinarius” was a servant who was duly appointed
to a definite permanent position (officium ordinarium) and exercised
authority over those under him; the verb “ordinare” being used of
appointing to an "officium ordinarium,” e.g. Vesp. 23, dispensatorem
ordinavit. Cf. Sen. Ben. iii 28, Quo tandem ab istis gerulis raperis?
ad ostium alicuius ostiarii, ad hortos alicuius ne ordinarium quidem habentis
officium: id. Ep. 110, 1, unicuique nostrum paedagogum dari deum non
quidem ordinarium, sed hunc inferioris notae, ex eorum numero quos Ovidius
ait "de plebe deos": Ep. 53, 9, exercet philosophia regnum suum; dat
tempus, non accipit; non est res subsiciva; ordinaria est, domina est;
adest et iubet (see Summers ad loc.): Ulp. Dig. xiv 4, 5, si vicarius servi
mei negotietur, ordinario sciente.
dispensatori: see on Vesp. 22.
breviarium rationum: "abstract of accounts” (= “breviariae
rationes," Scaev. Dig. xxxiii 8, 26); see on Vesp. 21. In some of the
MSS., including M, rationem is read, and Bücheler would delete the word
or write breviariam rationem.
paropsidem: restored by Stephanus; M has par obsidem and the other
MSS. give parabsidem, parapsidem, per obsidem. παροψίς (ὄψον) was used
by the Gr. comic writers either for a dainty side-dish or entrée or for the
actual dish on which the dainty was served, though this latter use was
condemned by the Atticists (Phryn. παροψὶς τὸ ὄψον, οὐχὶ δὲ τὸ ἀγγεῖον.
Rutherford New Phrynichus p. 265).
In Latin writers it is always used
for the actual dish; see Mayor on Juv. iii 142, quam multa magmaque
paropside cenat?
Cano: this famous flute-player is mentioned by Martial (iv 5, 8;
x 3, 8). Philostratus (vit. Apoll. v 21) describes an interview at Rhodes
between Canus and Apollonius of Tyana on the subject of flute-playing,
and Plutarch (an seni res p. ger. sit, c. 5 p. 786c) quotes a dictum of his
that his audience never knew how much more pleasure he was getting from
his playing than they, otherwise they would demand payment from him
instead of paying to hear him.
choraulae: the choraules (χοραύλης) accompanied a chorus, generally
on double pipes. Martial (v 56) mentions the profession of a choraules as
a lucrative one, but (ix 77) would exclude such choral performances from
dinners, as drowning conversation: Quod optimum sit quaeritis convivium?
In quo choraules non erit.
denarios quinque: Plutarch (Galb. 16) says that Galba gave Canus
some gold pieces, and emphasized the fact that he was giving them out of
his own purse and not out of state funds: βουλόμενος δὲ τῆς περὶ τὰς δωρεὰς
ἀμετρίας καὶ πολυτελείας τοῦ Νέρωνος ἀποδεικνύναι μεγάλην μεταβολὴν ἀστοχεῖν ἐδόκει
τοῦ πρέποντος ("to miss the mark of propriety"). Κάνου γὰρ αὐλήσαντος αὐτῷ παρὰ
δεῖπνον (ἀκρόαμα δὲ ἦν ὁ Κάνος εὐδοκιμούμενον) ἐπαινέσας καὶ ἀποδεξάμενος ἐκέλευσεν
αὑτῷ κομισθῆναι τὸ γλωσσόκομον (“purse"), καὶ λαβὼν χρυσοῦς τινας ἐπέδωκε τῷ
Κάνῳ, φήσας ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων, οὐκ ἐκ τῶν δημοσίων χαρίζεσθαι. Dio (lxiv 2) says that
Galba was so penurious that on occasions he would not even give denarii
when making presents, but only sestertii: χρήματα ἀπλήστως, ἅτε καὶ πολλῶν
δεόμενος, ἤθροιζε, καὶ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐλάχιστα ἀνήλισκεν, ὥστε μηδὲ δραχμὰς ἔστιν οἷς,
ἀλλ᾽ ὀβολοὺς χαρίζεσθαι. Contrast the lavish sums which Vespasian gave to
musicians (Vesp. 19, 1).
peculiaribus: = propriis, ἰδίοις, denoting what was his own private
property; cf. Iul. 76, 3, peculiares servi (opp. to publici): Aug. 5, quasi
proprio suo ac peculiari deo. This adj. (from peculium "a slave's
savings'') is used in another sense in Vitell. 4.
loculis: loculi (always plur.) was used of any kind of a casket or case
with compartments for holding keys, jewels, etc.; in the sense of money-box
or purse it occurs in Hor. S. i 3, 17 ii 3, 146, Ер. ің 1, 175; Juv. i 89 (see
Mayor), x 46, xi 33; Mart. v 39, 7; etc.
CHAPTER 13.
non perinde gratus: this elliptical use of perinde with the implied
comparison omitted is frequent in Silver Latin; the meaning may often be
expressed in full by non perinde ac facile crederes, "not so much as you
might expect" and so "not very much"; e.g. Tib. 52, 1, itaque ne mortuo
quidem perinde adfectus est "not moved by his death in the way you would
expect'": Tac. A. ii 88, Romanis haud perinde celebris "not so famous as
he should have been": id. Agr. 10, mare perhibent ne ventis quidem
perinde attolli: id. H. ii 84, Vespasiano
haud perinde obstinante. See
also on "non adeo,” Oth. 5, 2.
.
spectaculo: the spectacles or shows were divided into the Circus, the
Amphitheatre, the Theatre, and the Stadium; theatrical performances being,
as Friedlaender says, the most frequent, the least costly and troublesome,
and the least appreciated.
Atellanis: the Atellani were the actors in the Atellanae (fabulae), a
burlesque popular comedy (transplanted from Atella in Campania to Rome),
which at first was an improvisation, but in Sulla's time had become literary.
It was generally a one-act piece with four stock characters: Pappus (the
dotard or pantaloon), Dossennus (the wise man, the dottore, the cunning
sharper), Bucco (the glutton), and Maccus (the booby). The Atellanae
were full of broad humour and indecent allusions. See Friedlaender,
Sitteng. ii¹º 112 sq., where a list of the subjects of the Atellanae is given.
canticum: this word was used in two senses: (a) a canticum proper was
a lyrical monody accompanied by a flute and sung with appropriate gesture;
(b) in a wider sense cantica included all the parts of a play which were
*written in trochaic septenarii and declaimed with musical accompaniment
as a kind of recitative. Livius Andronicus (c. 284-204) introduced the
custom of having the words of the lyrical canticum sung by a young slave
standing beside the flute-player, thus leaving the actor free to perform the
accompanying gestures. Such cantica formed part of the Atellanae and
Mimi as well as of the ordinary tragedies and comedies. The words and
airs of some of the cantica became so familiar to the public that they were
often sung separately like our operatic airs; cf. Suet. Iul. 84, where
cantica are sung at the funeral of Caesar and move the people by the
allusions which they find in them to the fate of the dictator. In Vitell. 11,
2, "cantica Neroniana” composed or sung by Nero are mentioned; in Tac.
A. xiii 15 we read of Britannicus singing a canticum from the Andromache
of Ennius which fitly described his own treatment by Nero. The licence of
actors in conveying political allusions by lines in the Atellanae and the keen
appreciation of such "hits" by the audience are often referred to by
Suetonius; see the passages cited on Vesp. 19, 2.
...
"Venit Onesimus a villa": the reading is uncertain: venit onesimus
is found only in a late MS., the others give venitione (or veditione) simus
(or simul). The name "Onesimus" had been conjectured by Augustinus
and is accepted by Oudendorp, Roth, and the recent editors. Lachmann
suggested "Dorsennus" (adopted by Ribbeck Com. Rom. frag. p. 274),
Dorsennus or Dossennus being a standing character in the Atellan plays
(see note above, and Wilkins on Hor. Ep. ii 1, 173). Other conjectures are
venit io Simus (Turnebus) and venit ohe Simus (Iac. Gronovius), Simus
"snub-nosed" being a rustic in comedy (cf. Pollux iv 19, τῷ ἀγροίκῳ
ἡ ῥὶς σιμή) and Galba being described as "adunco naso" in c. 21 infr. It
seems however from the context that the allusion must rather be to the
niggardly grasping nature of Galba, and Hofstee finds a special appropriateness in the name Onesimus: “nomen Onesimi a verbo quod est ὀνινάναι,
aptissimum est ad designandum hominem avarum.” This canticum was
probably a lament of the familia on the unwelcome arrival of the old master
from the country. Galba had been long absent from Rome, having lived
for many years in secessu before the governorship in Spain was offered to
him in 60; see c. 8, 1.
egerunt: they went through all the gestures appropriate to the singing
of the canticum; for the use of agere cf. Liv. vii 2, 9, (Livius Andronicus)
suorum carminum actor dicitur, cum
vocem obtudisset, puerum ad
canendum cum statuisset, canticum egisse aliquanto magis vigente motu,
quia nihil vocis usus impediebat.
..
...
CHAPTER 14.
maiore imperium: the truth of the maxim ἀρχὴ δείξει ἄνδρα was
illustrated in the case of Galba; cf. Tac. H. i 49, maior privato visus dum
privatus fuit, et omnium consensu capax imperii nisi imperasset: Auson.
Caes. vii, Spe frustrate ("deceptive in thy promise'") senex, privatus
sceptra mereri visus et (es, Peiper) imperio proditus inferior, fama tibi
melior iuveni; sed iustior ordo est | complacuisse dehinc, displicuisse prius.
...
adeo: of this use of adeo “ad augendas singulas voces, quibus postponitur sicut ye" there are numerous instances (including this) collected in
the Thes. Ling. Lat. i col. 614 sq., e.g. Claud. 37, 1, nulla adeo suspicio
tam levis exstitit: Ner. 35, 4, nullum adeo genus est: Iul. 14, 2, obtinuissetque adeo: Plaut. Amph. 1133, multo adeo melius (where see Palmer's
note): Verg. G. i 94, multum adeo iuvat: Cic. de or. ii 15, magis adeo
id facilitate quam alia ulla culpa mea contigit.
quanquam: used by Suetonius 15 times with the subjunctive (never
with the indicative). The few apparent instances of this constr. in Cicero
are to be explained either by the potential force of the subjunctive or by
assimilation of moods (Kühner-Stegmann, ii 442). A few examples are
found in Varr., Nep., the poets (e.g. Verg. Aen. vi 394, Ov. Met. xiv 465),
Liv., Colum., Sen., etc. The subjunctive is more frequent than the indicative
in Tacitus (Draeger, Synt. Tac. 201) and in the younger Pliny (Merrill on
Plin. Ep. i 12, 3).
documenta egregii principis daret: cf. Claud. 15, 1, proprio negotio
documentum daturus, quam aequus iudex in alieno negotio futurus sit.; for
the personal genitive following documentum cf. Vell. Pat. ii 42, documentum
tanti mox evasuri viri.
invisa: Tac. H. i 7, ceterum utraque caedes (i.e. the killing of Clodius
Macer and Fonteius Capito, see c. 11 supr.) sinistre accepta, et inviso semel
principi seu bene seu male facta parem invidiam adferebant. Dio (lxiv 2)
says that Galba, however guiltless himself, was held responsible for the
outrages committed by his freedmen, because he either permitted them or
was culpably ignorant of them.
§ 2. regebatur trium arbitrio: the same statement is made in Tac. H. i
13, potentia principatus divisa in Titum Vinium consulem, Cornelium
Laconem praetorii praefectum; nec minor gratia Icelo Galbae liberto.
Corneille (Othon i 1) makes Otho say of them: Je les voyais tous trois se
hâter sous un maître, Qui, chargé d'un long âge, a peu de temps à l'être;
Et tous trois à l'envi s'empresser ardemment A qui dévorerait ce règne
d'un moment.
paedagagos: (Aur. Vict.] Epit. 6, trium amicorum consilio, id est
Vinii, Cornelii, et Iceli cuncta disponens, adeo ut intra Palatinas aedes
pariter habitarent, et vulgo paedagogi dicerentur. So Tigellinus, the infamous minister of Nero, was denounced by the people as “τὸν διδάσκαλον·
καὶ παιδαγωγὸν τῆς τυραννίδος” (Plut. Galb. 17). The παιδαγωγός (whence
our "pedagogue" and "page'') was the slave-tutor who looked after the
manners and morals of children and conducted them to and from school;
his qualifications and his duties in a Roman house are described by Wilkins,
Roman Education, p. 40 sq.
The word came to be used in an extended
sense for a leader or guide, e.g. Sen. Ep. 110 unicuique nostrum paedagogum
dari deum inferioris notae.
T. Vinius: his career is sketched in Tac. H. i 48. His father was of
a praetorian family and his maternal (paternal, Dio xlvii 7) grandfather
was proscribed by the triumvirs in 43 в.с. He was born in 12 A.D. and
served as military tribune under Calvisius Sabinus, legatus of Pannonia
in Caligula's reign, but was disgraced and imprisoned for an intrigue with
his general's wife. Liberated under Claudius, he passed through the
cursus honorum and after his praetorship was appointed legatus legionis.
Though suspected of having stolen a gold cup from the table of Claudius,
he was made proconsul of Gallia Narbonensis and administered the province
strictly. Later he served in Spain as legatus of Galba, and when Galba
was made emperor, held the consulship with him in 69 A.D.; he was the
next victim of Otho's soldiers after they had slain Galba. Tacitus (l.c.)
says that he was "audax, callidus, promptus, et, prout animum intendisset,
pravus aut industrius eadem vi," but in i 6 (quoted below) he tersely
stigmatizes him as "deterrimus mortalium."
legatus: sc. legionis; cf. Plut. Galb. 4, Τίτος Οὐίνιος ὁ τοῦ στρατιωτικοῦ
τάγματος ἡγεμών (where see Hardy). Galba as governor of Hispania
Tarraconensis had one legion, vi Victrix (c. 10, 2). Vinius persuaded
Galba to aid the designs of Vindex; see on c. 9, 2.
cupiditatis immensae: Plut. Galb. 12, ἦν δὲ Οὐίνιος ἀργυρίου ἐσχάτως καὶ
παρ᾿ ὁντινοῦν (praeter omnes) ἥττων. Plutarch also tells how the notorious
Tigellinus bought his life by vast presents to Vinius, a striking proof
that there was nothing he would not do for money (μέγα δίδαγμα τοῦ μηδὲν
ἄπρακτον εἶναι παρὰ Οὐινίῳ μηδὲ ἀνέλπιστον τοῖς διδοῦσιν, Galb. 17). For cupiditas
see on Vesp. 1, 1.
Cornelius Laco: nothing is known as to his previous history; Tacitus
(H. i 6) describes his character: invalidum senem (i.e. Galba) Titus
Vinius et Cornelius Laco, alter deterrimus mortalium, alter ignavissimus,
odio flagitiorum oneratum contemptu inertiae destruebant (i.e. the
flagitia of Vinius and the inertia of Laco). The three "paedagogi”
quarrelled over the nomination of a colleague and successor to Galba,
Vinius supporting the adoption of Otho, Laco and Icelus that of
Piso (ib. 13); Laco refused to be sent by Galba to appease the
discontent of the Germanic legions under Vitellius (ib. 19); he concealed
from Galba the murmurings of his soldiers (ib. 26, multa erumpentis
seditionis indicia per conscios suppressa: quaedam apud Galbae aures praefectus Laco elusit, ignarus militarium animorum consiliique quamvis egregii,
quod non ipse afferret, inimicus et adversus peritos pervicax); he persuaded
Galba to adopt his fatal advice that he should present himself to the
angry soldiers who had declared for Otho (ib. 33); on Otho's accession he
was sentenced to be deported, but Otho secretly commissioned his guard to
assassinate him (ib. 46); Plutarch (Galb. 27) says, however, that he was
slain at the same time as Galba.
"conassessore: "assessores” (πάρεδροι), also called in later writers
siliarii,””‘“iuris studiosi,” were men versed in the law who sat as legal
advisers to various civil and military functionaries when administering
justice, assisting by their technical knowledge consuls, praetors, governors
of provinces, iudices, the praefectus praetorio, the praefectus urbi, etc.
The emperors appointed salaried assessores (consiliarii) to act with the
legati provinciarum (Mommsen, Staatsr. i³ 318, ii³ 245). Paulus, who wrote
a work De Officio Adsessoris, specifies the matters with which they dealt:
Dig. i 22, 1, Omne iudicium adsessoris, quo iuris studiosi partibus suis
funguntur, in his fere causis constat: in cognitionibus, postulationibus,
libellis, edictis, decretis, epistulis. The famous jurisconsult Ulpian, like
Laco, held the position of assessor before becoming praefectus praetorio
under Alexander Severus (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 31).
praefectus praetorii: see on Tit. 4, 2 and 6, 1.
Icelus: this freedman of Galba was imprisoned at Rome by Nero when
he learnt of Galba's revolt in Spain, but he was released on Nero's death,
and allowed Nero's body to be cremated: Ner. 49, 4, permisit hoc Icelus,
Galbae libertus, non multo ante vinculis exsolutus in quae primo tumultu
coniectus fuerat. He conveyed to Galba the news of Nero's death and of
Galba's acclamation as emperor (Galb. 11 and 22), and Galba rewarded him
with the rank and insignia of an eques. He supported Laco against Vinius
(Tac. H. i 13) and opposed the adoption of Otho by Galba. On Galba's
death Otho had him executed as a “libertus,” ignoring the ingenuitas conferred by his rank as "eques”: Tac. i 46, in Marcianum Icelum ut in
libertum palam animadversum.
anulis aureis ornatus: the sign of equestrian dignity; see on c. 10, 3.
Plutarch says he became the most influential of the freedmen: Galb. 7,
τῷ δ᾽ ἀπελευθέρῳ (liberto) δακτυλίους τε χρυσοῦς ἔδωκε καὶ Μαρκιανὸς ὁ Ἴκελος ἤδη
καλούμενος εἶχε τὴν πρώτην ἐ ντοῖς ἀπελευθέροις δύναμιν : cf. Tac. H. i 13, пес
minor gratia Icelo Galbae liberto, quem anulis donatum equestri nomine
Marcianum vocitabant. Other instances of the bestowal of equestrian rank
on unworthy freedmen were by Nero on Pallas (Plin. Ep. viii 6), by
Vitellius on Asiaticus (Suet. Vitell. 12), and by Vespasian on Hormus (Tac.
Η. iv 39).
Marciani cognomine: his new name would be Servius Sulpicius
Marcianus, as he would assume the gentile nomen (Sulpicius) and praenomen
(Servius) of his patronus Galba. See Hardy on Plut. Galb. 7.
summae equestris gradus: the “summa equestris," i.e. the highest
office attainable by equites, was the praefectura praetorii (see on Tit. 4, 2).
Under the emperor Marcus Aurelius, an eques, according to the office he
held, was designated as (1) vir eminentissimus (ἐξοχώτατος), a prefect of
the praetorian guard; (2) vir perfectissimus (διασημότατος), any other
prefect, from the praefectus classis to the praefectus annonae, or a head
of the secretariate or of the finance department; (3) vir egregius (κράτιστος),
a holder of any of the lesser offices open to equites. Cf. Mommsen, Staatsr.
iii³ 565.
grassantibus: see on Vesp. 6, 2, omni rapinarum genere grassati.
Tacitus (H. i 37) uses the same word in Otho's speech denouncing the
rapacious outrages of Galba's ministers: Septem a Neronis fine menses
sunt et iam plus rapuit Icelus quam Polycliti et Vatinii et Aegiali (extortionate freedmen of Nero) quoad perierunt. Minore avaritia ac licentia
grassatus esset T. Vinius, si ipse imperasset: nunc et subiectos nos habuit
tanquam suos et viles ut alienos.
adeo se abutendum permisit: cf. the words of Nymphidius Sabinus in
Plut. Galb. 13, ἔφη Γάλβαν μὲν αὐτὸν εἶναι πρεσβύτην ἐπιεικῆ καὶ μέτριον, ἐλάχιστα
δὲ τοῖς αὑτοῦ χρώμενον λογισμοῖς ὑπὸ Οὐινίου καὶ Λάκωνος οὐκ εὖ διοικεῖσθαι. abutor
was used with the acc. in early Lat., hence the gerundive; Cicero has
utendus, fruendus, perfruendus, fungendus (Kühner-Stegmann, i 733).
ut vix ipse sibi constaret: he had shown the same inconsistency in his
administration of Hispania Tarraconensis; see c. 9, 1.
parcior: Tacitus (H. i 49) describes Galba as "pecuniae alienae non
appetens, suae parcus, publicaė avarus.”
principi electo: the emperors before him had succeeded to the empire
as a kind of inheritance: cf. Galba's own words in the speech attributed to
him in Tac. H. i 16, Sub Tiberio et Gaio et Claudio unius familiae quasi
hereditas fuimus: loco libertatus erit, quod eligi coepimus.
illud aetatis: 73 years of age. For the adverbial accusative cf. Cic.
Phil. viii 5, cum illud esset aetatis; similarly id (hoc, istuc) aetatis, id
temporis, hoc noctis, illud horae (Ner. 26, 2, numquam publico se illud horae
commisit); in Tac. A. xii 18 we find nemo id auctoritatis aderat. See
Kühner-Stegmann, i 306.
8, 3.
§ 3. ex utroque ordine: senatorio et equestri; cf. Vesp. 9, 2: Dom.
inauditos: = indictâ (incognita) causâ, re inoratâ, a post-Aug. use found
in Tac., Plin. Ep., etc.; cf. Vitell. 14, 4: Claud. 38, 2. In class. Lat.
inauditus means 'unheard of,” “strange," in which sense it is used in
Calig. 19, 1; 40: Ner. 42, 1.
civitates R. raro dedit: Galba granted the franchise to the Gallic communities of the Sequani, Aedui, and Arverni, who had supported Vindex
(Tac. H. i 8, 51); it is doubtful whether it was bestowed on these people
at large or only on a certain number of their leading men (see Heraeus
and Spooner on Tac. l.c. and Hardy on Plut. Galb. 18). The ius civitatis
was very charily conferred by Augustus (Aug. 40, 3, civitates R. parcissime
dedit); so too by Tiberius and Caligula; Claudius was very lavish (Dio lx
17, τὴν πολιτείαν πάνυ ἀνέδην, τοῖς μὲν κατ' ἄνδρα, τοῖς δὲ καὶ ἀθρόοις, ἐδίδου), and
Nero also gave it indiscriminately (cf. Ner. 12, 1, where he bestows
“diplomata civitatis R.'' on Greek dancers).
iura trium liberorum: under the Lex Iulia de maritandis ordinibus
(18 B.c.) and an amplification of it, the Lex Papia Poppaea (9 A.D.),
Augustus rewarded those with three or more children and penalised the
unmarried and those who were married but childless. The unmarried were
taxed and could not inherit by will, and the childless could only take
half a hereditas or legatum, the remainder going to the Treasury as a
caducum. A fictitious ius liberorum, however, was granted by the senate
in several cases and later by the emperors from Claudius on (Dio lv 2,
Suet. Claud. 19). Martial obtained it from Domitian (Epigr. ii 91, 92)
and Statius (Silv. iv 8, 20) mentions another grant by him; Pliny the
Younger was granted it by Trajan (Plin. Ep. x 2) and also obtained it
for some of his friends including Suetonius (Ep. x 94, 95). A preference
in election to offices and choice of provinces was given to persons having
children (Tac. A. ii 51 xv 19 Plin. Ep. vii 16). See Roby, Roman Private
Law i 381; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 888.
uni atque alteri: "one or two," "a few"; cf. Vesp. 4, 6, uno atque
altero proelio: Iul. 20, 5, uno atque altero frustra nominatis: Tib. 63, 2:
Claud. 12, 3. Suetonius has only unus et (or atque) alter; Tacitus uses
unus et alter, unus alterque, unus aut alter, unus alterve to denote "indefinitum numerum eumque non magnum” (Gerber and Greef, Lex. Tас.).
sextam decuriam: three decuriae of iudices were formed by the Lex
Aurelia (70 B.C.) which enacted that the iudices should be chosen from
the three classes of senatores, equites, and tribuni aerarii. Julius Caesar
by a Lex Iulia iudiciaria (46 B.c.) did away with the decuria of the
tribuni aerarii, but a third decuria was restored by M. Antonius (44 в.с.),
the property qualification being removed and service as a centurion or
in the cavalry or in the legio Alauda substituted. Augustus added to the
three existing decuriae (which, according to Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 535,
he composed entirely of equites) a fourth of ducenarii, i.e. those whose
census reached 200,000 sesterces (half that of an eques), this fourth decuria
adjudicating in cases involving smaller amounts ("de levioribus summis,”
Aug. 32, 3). Caligula added a fifth decuria to lighten the labours of the
jurymen ("ut levior labor iudicantibus foret," Calig. 16, 2).
concessum a Claudio beneficium: Claud. 23, 1, Rerum actum divisum
antea in hibernos aestivosque menses coniunxit (“actus rerum" denotes
the legal term-time during which the courts sat). Augustus, to expedite
legal business, added to the law-term thirty extra days which had previously
been given over to ludi honorarii, and as the jurymen tried to shirk their
onerous duties, he reluctantly granted each decuria, in its turn, exemption
for one year, and gave all four decuriae vacation in November and
December (Aug. 32). By the time of Claudius this had come to be altered,
and there were legal vacations in spring and autumn; Claudius apparently
arranged that the iudices should serve continuously from spring to the
beginning of winter (see Smilda on Claud. 23, 1). For "beneficium” see
note on Tit. 8, 1.
CHAPTER 15.
senatoria et equestria officia: the positions held by senators under the
Principate included the offices of state at Rome, provincial governorships,
the command of the legions, the prefectship of the city, and commissionerships (curationes) of the water-supply, roads, public works, etc. See
Greenidge, Rom. Publ. Life p. 401. On the other hand, the knights (equites)
held a number of administrative and financial positions from which senators
were excluded: the government of Egypt was reserved to them, and the
smaller provinces to the north of Italy were under equestrian governors;
the commanders of the fleet were equites, as were many of the prefects
appointed by Augustus, e.g. the praefectus annonae, pr. praetorii, pr.
vigilum; most important of all were the financial offices entrusted to them:
the imperial tax-officers (procuratores Augusti) in the provinces were chosen
from the equites alone. Presumably the officia which Galba wished to circumscribe were more especially the provincial governorships and fiscal
procuratorships.
nisi invitis ac recusantibus: Galba may have hoped by this novel.
method of appointment to secure provincial governors and commanders of
legions, who, being free from any desire of self-aggrandisement, would not
endanger the emperor's position; also fiscal procurators who would not
oppress by merciless exactions the wretched provincials as those in Galba's
own province had done (see on c. 9, 1). Vespasian promoted the most
rapacious procurators, that they might be the richer when he condemned
them later (Vesp. 16, 2). Galba's mode of appointing to public offices was
adopted by Alexander Severus: praefectum praetorii fecit, qui ne fieret
etiam fugerat, dicens invitos non ambientes in re publica conlocandos
(Lamprid. Alex. 19).
liberalitates Neronis: liberalitates = dona (abstract for concrete, see
on "custodias" Dom. 14, 4) as in Claud. 29, 1, revocatas liberalitates eius;
so in sing., Tib. 46, una modo liberalitate milites prosecutus. Tacitus is the
first to use liberalitas in this way. The enormous sum of 2200 million
sesterces (nearly £20,000,000) is said to have been lavished by Nero (Tac.
H. i 20); cf. Ner. 30, 2, Quare nec largiendi nec absumendi modum tenuit.
In Tiridatem, quod vix credibile videatur, octingena nummum milia diurna
erogavit abeuntique super sestertium milies contulit. Menecraten citharoedum et Spiculum murmillonem triumphalium virorum patrimoniis aedibusque donavit.
revocandas curavit: the efforts made by Galba to recover Nero's
bounties from the recipients are described also in Tac. H. i 20: Appellari
("to be sued") singulos iussit, decuma parte liberalitatis apud quemque
corum relicta. At illis vix decumae super portiones erant, isdem erga aliena
sumptibus, quibus sua prodegerant, cum rapacissimo cuique ac perditissimo
non agri aut faenus (“capital'') sed sola instrumentà vitiorum manerent.
Exactioni triginta (Suet. says 50) equites R. praepositi, novum officii genus
et ambitu ac numero onerosum. Ubique hasta et sector ("sales and
brokers'") et inquieta urbs actionibus ("trials"; auctionibus, Ritter and
Orelli). Dio (lxiii 14) mentions that the sum of a million sesterces given
by Nero to the Ἑλλανοδίκαι (judges at the Olympic games) was recovered
by Galba, and also 400,000 sesterces given to the Pythian prophetess for
favourable oracles. In 24 A.D. Tiberius wrested from the estate of C. Silius
the bounty granted him by Augustus (Tac. A. iv 20, liberalitas Augusti
avulsa).
scaenici: stage-players, actors (histriones); cf. Cic. Off. i 31, 114;
Planc. 30; Verr. iii 184. Nero himself is spoken of contemptuously as “ille
scaenicus" in Tac. A. xv 59; in his mania for the stage he even thought of
appearing as a professional actor (inter scaenicos) when one of the praetors
offered him a million sesterces to perform at one of his shows (Ner. 21, 2).
xystici: athletes"; Aид. 45, 4, xysticorum certationes: Tertull.
Spect. 30, tunc xystici contemplandi non in gymnasio sed in igne iaculati;
ib. 20, atrocitas harenae, vanitas xysti: Ulp. Dig. iii 2, 4, omnes opinantur
ignoet utile videtur ut neque thymelici neque xystici neque agitatores
miniosi habeantur. The xystus was a covered colonnade where athletes
exercised in winter (Vitruv. v 11); it is the Gr. ξυστός (from ξύειν το
scrape, make smooth) and may originally have denoted the part of the
gymnasium where the athletes scraped off the oil and dust with the strigilis,
though some think that the name came from the smooth polished floor.
xystus was also used for an open colonnade, a garden-walk or terrace
adorned with flowers and shrubs, as in Aug. 72, 3, xystis et nemoribus
excoluit praetoria ("country mansions'') sua, and in Pliny's description
of his villas (Ep. ii 17, v 6). Nero's passion for Greek athletics is mentioned in Ner. 12, 3: Instituit et quinquennale certamen primus omnium
Romae, more Graeco triplex, musicum, gymnicum, equestre, quod appellavit Neronia; dedicatisque thermis atque gymnasio senatui quoque et equiti
oleum praebuit; Tac. A. xiv 47, etc.
auferretur emptoribus: this is omitted by Tacitus (H. i 20) but
mentioned in Plut. Galb. 16, τοὺς πριαμένους παρ' αὐτῶν ἢ λαβόντας ὁτιοῦν
ἀνεζήτει καὶ παρ᾽ ἐκείνων ἐξέπραττε.
quando nequirent: quando is used here in a temporal and not in a
causal sense; see on Vesp. 16, 3.
§2. comites: see on Vesp. 4, 4.
libertos: Tac. H. i 7, venalia cuncta, praepotentes liberti, servorum
(used contemptuously for libertorum) manus subitis avidae et tanquam
apud senem festinantes; eademque (i.e. the same as in Nero's court) novae
auiae mala, aeque gravia, non aeque excusata. The freedmen are Icelus
and Halotus (Spooner on Tac. l.c. adds Tigellinus, but he was not a freedman). Plutarch (Galb. 16) blames Vinius for bringing Galba into disrepute by the attempt to recover the bounties of Nero and for his own
shameless trafficking: φθόνον δὲ καὶ μῖσος εἶχεν Οὐίνιος, ὡς τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἅπασιν
ἀνελεύθερον παρέχων τὸν ἡγεμόνα καὶ μικρολόγον, αὐτὸς δὲ χρώμενος ἀσώτως καὶ
λαμβάνων πάντα καὶ πιπράσκων. Ὁ μὲν γὰρ Ησίοδος ἀρχομένου τε πίθου καὶ λήγοντος
κορέσασθαι φησὶ δεῖν, ὁ δὲ Οὐίνιος ὁρῶν ἀσθενῆ καὶ γέροντα τὸν Γάλβαν ἐνεπίμπλατο
τῆς τύχης, ὡς ἅμα μὲν ἀρχομένης, ἅμα δὲ φθινούσης.
addici: the regular word for knocking a thing down at an auction; e.g.
Aug. 24, 1, equitem Romanum bonaque subiecit hastae ("auction''), quem
tamen liberto suo addixit: Calig. 38, 4, nec licendi ('bidding'") finem
factum quoad tredecim gladiatores sestertio nonagies addicerentur.
vectigalia: see on Vesp. 16, 1, omissa sub Galba vectigalia. Cf. Plut.
Galb. 18, ἐδόκουν γὰρ οὐ φιλανθρωπίᾳ τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος, ἀλλ᾽ ὠνούμενοι παρὰ Οὐινίου
τυγχάνειν ἀνέσεώς τε δασμῶν καὶ πολιτείας.
impunitates: the pl. is not found earlier, but Cicero has immunitates.
populo deposcente supplicium: in the circus and in the theatre the
people clamoured for the death of Tigellinus; cf. Plut. Galb. 17, οὐδένος
γὰρ οὕτω θεάματος ἐρασθεὶς ὁ ῾Ῥωμαίων δῆμος ὡς τοῦ Τιγελλῖνον ἰδεῖν ἀπαγόμενον,
οὐδὲ παυσάμενος ἐν πᾶσι θεάτροις καὶ σταδίοις αἰτούμενος ἐκεῖνον : Tac. Η. i 72, non
alium pertinacius ad poenam flagitaverunt Eo infensior populus, addita
ad vetus Tigellini odium recenti Titi Vinii invidia, concurrere ex tota urbe
in Palatium ac fora, et ubi plurima vulgi licentia, in circum ac theatra effusi
seditiosis vocibus strepere. See also Dio lxiv 3, cited below.
...
Haloti: a eunuch who held the position of "food taster” (“praegustator," Claud. 44) at the court of Claudius. He was one of the agents
used by Agrippina to administer to Claudius the poison prepared by Locusta
(Тас. 4. xii 66), and he continued his infamous career under Nero.
Tigillini: “Tigillinus'" (not "Tigellinus'') is the form attested by our
MSS. here, by those of Martial (iii 20, 16), and by the Schol. on Juv. i 155;
the Medicean MS. of Tacitus also gives "Tigillinus" except in Ann. xiv 48,
xv 37. On the other hand, "Tigellinus" is found in the text of Juvenal
(l.c.) and in most of the MSS. of Plutarch, Dio, and Josephus; see Prosop.
Imp. Rom. iii 250. There is also doubt with regard to the first part of his
name, whether it was "Sophonius" or "C. Ofonius"; the best MSS, in
Tac. H. i 72 (see Heraeus) and inscriptions give "Ofonius." He was a
son of a native of Agrigentum, and early became notorious for his beauty
and immorality. He was banished by Caligula for intriguing with the
emperor's sisters. Favoured by Agrippina he was made praetorian prefect
by Nero in 63 and encouraged Nero in his licentious career (intimis libidinibus adsumptus, Tac. A. xiv 51). He and the empress Poppaea formed
Nero's privy council (intimum consiliorum, A. xv '61); to them was largely
due the number of executions after Piso's conspiracy in 65. He deserted
Nero at his downfall and helped to win the soldiers for Galba. On Otho's
accession he was forced to commit suicide (Tac. H. i 72, infamem vitam
foedavit etiam exitu sero et inhonesto). See Mayor's note on Juv. i 155,
Pone Tigellinum: taeda lucebis in illa | qua stant ardentes qui fixo gutture
fumant.
emissariis: see on Dom. 11, 1.
incolumes praestitit: Dio (lxiv 3) says that Galba, true to his principle
that an emperor should not act under compulsion, refused to yield to the
popular clamour, though, had it not been for this clamour, he would probably have executed Tigellinus and his fellows, as he executed Narcissus,
Locusta the poisoner, and others. According to Tacitus (H. i 72) it was
the influence of Vinius which protected Tigellinus: Apud Galbam Titi
Vinii potentia defensus (Tigellinus) praetexentis servatam ab eo filiam.
Haud dubie servaverat non clementia, quippe tot interfectis, sed effugium
in futurum, quia pessimus quisque diffidentia praesentium mutationem
pavens adversus publicum odium privatam gratiam praeparat. Plutarch
(Galb. 17) adds that Tigellinus had secured the protection of Vinius by
large sums of money.
procuratione: the particular procuratorship is nowhere specified; he
may be the same Halotus as is mentioned in C.I.L. vi 8833, Halotus
Aug(usti) l(ibertus) proc(urator).
saevitiae increpuit: cf. Calig. 39, 2, avaritiae singulos increpans:
Apul. Apol. 77, levitatis et inconstantiae increpitus. For the wide use of
the Genitive of the Charge in non-class. Latin see Kühner-Stegmann, i 463.
edicto: Plutarch (l.c.) says that the edict alleged that Tigellinus was'
dying of a wasting disease, and it asked the people not to stain the rule of
Galba by needless bloodshed: ὁ ῾Ῥωμαίων δῆμος ἐπεπλήχθη (increpitus est)
διαγράμματι (edicto) τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος Τιγελλῖνον μὲν οὐ πολὺν ἔτι βιώσεσθαι
φάσκοντος χρόνον ὑπὸ φθινάδος νόσου δαπανώμενον, ἐκείνους δὲ παραιτουμένου μὴ
διαγριαίνειν μηδὲ τυραννικὴν ποιεῖν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν.
CHAPTER 16.
prope: propere, a variant in the later MSS., was approved by Burman
and read by Oudendorp.
offensis: in all the other passages (Iul. 19, 2; Tib. 13, 2: 34, 2;
Calig. 27, 4; Ner. 2, 1:38, 1) where Suetonius uses offensus it means
"offended," and so the reading offensis here is preferable to the variant
offensus (XN) "offensive," which is adopted by Roth.
vel praecipua: see on Dom. 19.
flagrabat invidia: "was in a blaze of unpopularity"; cf. Aug. 27, 3,
multiplici flagravit invidia: Tib. 44, 1, maiore adhuc et turpiore infamia
flagravit. The phrases flagrare invidia, infamia, etc. are common in Cicero.
Wickham on Hor. S. i 4, 125, cum flagret rumore malo, explains flagrare
as meaning "to be in the full glow of," i.e. to be the conspicuous victim
of.
in verba eius
iurantibus: see on c. 11.
donativum grandius solito: Plutarch (Galb. 2) says it was 7500
drachmae (= 30,000 sesterces) to each of the praetorians, and 1250 drachmae
(= 5000 sesterces) to each of the other soldiers. Hardy (on Plut. l.c.) calculates the total sum thus promised as 900 million sesterces, and suggests
that Nymphidius, when making the promise, probably knew that Galba
would refuse to pay the sum and hoped to gain by the consequent dissatisfaction of the troops. For the practice of granting such donativa to
the soldiers, and the amounts given by other emperors see on Dom. 2, 3.
praepositi: Nymphidius Sabinus (see on c. 11) and the other officers
who repeated his promises to their men.
pronuntiassent: = promisissent; cf. Dom. 4, 5: Calig. 46: Iul. 19, 1:
26, 2. So in Cicero, e.g. Att. i 16, 13, P. Clodium pronuntiare solitum esse
et non dare.
..
legere se militem consuesse: Tacitus (H. i 5) says that these were
noble words from the point of view of the commonwealth but dangerous
for Galba himself: accessit Galbae vox pro re publica honesta, ipsi anceps,
legi a se militem, non emi. Dio (lxiv 3) mentions the incident as an
example of Galba's strength of will in refusing to submit to dictation:
εἰ καὶ τῇ ἡλικίᾳ τῇ τε νόσῳ ἐκεκμήκει, ἀλλὰ τῇ διανοίᾳ ἤκμαζεν, οὐδ᾽ ἠξίου τὸν
αὐτοκράτορα ἀναγκαζόμενόν τι ποιεῖν· ἀμέλει καὶ τοῖς δορυφόροις (praetorianis)
αὐτοῦσι χρήματα οὐκ ἔδωκε, καὶ ἔφη γε ὅτι “καταλέγειν στρατιώτας ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀγοράζειν
εἴωθα.” Plutarch characterizes this utterance of Galba as “ φωνὴ ἡγεμόνι
μεγάλῳ πρέπουσα” (Galb. 18).
eo nomine: eâ causâ; see on Vesp. 4, 3.
exacerbavit: Plut. (l.c.), πυθομένοις τοῦτο δεινὸν εἰσῆλθε μίσος καὶ ἄγριον πρὸς
αὐτόν. Tacitus (H. i 25) says that the soldiers were turned against Galba
"ira et desperatione dilati toties donativi.”
indignitate: indignitas is used here in its subjective sense of "indignation"; cf. Cic. Att. x 8, 3, tacita esse poterit indignitas nostra?: Liv.
vii 7, 2, plenus irae et indignitatis. The objective sense of "indignity"
is much more frequent, and Baumg.-Cr. explains indignitas in our passage
by contumelia. In Calig. 23, 2, indignitates means "indignities," but in
the only other place where Suetonius uses the word, Claud. 36, Messalinae
amorem flagrantissimum non tam indignitate contumeliarum quam periculi
metu abiecit, it seems to mean "indignation" (cf. Liv. viii 28, 6, ingens
vis hominum cum aetatis miseratione tum indignitate iniuriae accensa
concurrit); Rolfe and Pike, however, explain indignitate contumeliarum as
"her unseemly and insulting conduct."
removens
plerosque: Tacitus (H. i 20) gives the names of some of
the officers cashiered by Galba when he heard of the revolt of the legions
in Germany: exauctorati per eas dies tribuni, e praetorio Antonius Taurus
et Antonius Naso, ex urbanis cohortibus Aemilius Pacensis, e vigilibus
Iulius Fronto.
ut suspectos et Nymphidi socios: those who owed their promotion to
Nymphidius incurred the suspicion of Galba; cf. Tac. H. i 25, stimulant
primores militum per beneficia Nymphidii ut suspectos. For the attempts of
Nymphidius to seduce the praetorians from their allegiance to Galba see
note on c. 11. His favourites, after their humiliation by Galba, flocked to
support Otho; Plut. Galb. 23, πλεῖστοι δὲ τῶν περὶ Τιγελλῖνον καὶ Νυμφίδιον ἐν
τιμῇ γεγονότων ἀπερριμμένοι καὶ ταπεινὰ πράττοντες ἐφθείροντο (“rushed headlong")
πρὸς αὐτὸν (i.e. Otho) καὶ συνηγανάκτουν καὶ παρώξυνον.
§ 2. superioris Germaniae exercitus: the army of Upper Germany
consisted of the following legions: iv Macedonica, xxi Rapax, xxii Primigenia (ii Augusta, which originally belonged to it, had been sent to Britain
by Claudius, Tac. A. xiv 37). Tacitus (H. i 8) describes the dangerous
temper of the armies in Germany at this time: Germanici exercitus, quod
periculosissimum in tantis viribus (7 legions in all), solliciti et irati, superbia
recentis victoriae (over Vindex) et metu tanquam alias partes (i.e. the side
of Verginius Rufus) fovissent. Tarde a Nerone desciverant; nec statim
pro Galba Verginius: an imperare noluisset dubium: delatum ei a milite
imperium conveniebat. Fonteium Capitonem occisum (note on c. 11)
etiam qui queri non poterant, tamen indignabantur. Dux deerat, abducto
Verginio per simulationem amicitiae; quem non remitti atque etiam reum
esse tanquam suum crimen ("an accusation against themselves'') accipiebant. Galba replaced Verginius by Hordeonius Flaccus, a feeble old man
incapable of maintaining discipline, and sent Aulus Vitellius to command in
Lower Germany (Vitell. 7, 1). Cf. also Dio lxiv 4, and Plut. Galb. 18
where an example is given of the mutinous spirit of the army under
Hordeonius Flaccus: one day when games were being held and the officers
according to custom made vows for the happiness of the emperor, the
soldiers turbulently added the words "If he deserves it." For the
boundaries, etc., of the two Germanies (superior and inferior) see on
Vitell. 7, 1.
Gallos et Vindicem: see on c. 9, 2, and c. 11. Plut. (l.c.), οἱ ὑπὸ
Φλάκκῳ, μεγάλων μὲν ἀξιοῦντες αὑτοὺς διὰ τὴν μάχην, ἣν ἐμαχέσαντο πρὸς Οὐΐνδικα,
μηδένος δὲ τυγχάνοντες, ἀπαρηγόρητοι τοῖς ἄρχουσιν ἦσαν.
Kal. Ian. adigi
recusarunt: Tac. H. i 12, Paucis post kalendas
Ianuarias diebus Pompeii Propinqui procuratoris e Belgica litterae
adferuntur, superioris Germaniae legiones rupta sacramenti reverentia
imperatorem alium flagitare et senatui ac populo Romano arbitrium eligendi
permittere, quo seditio mollius acciperetur. Tacitus (c. 55) says further
that the army of Lower Germany did take the oath to Galba, though not
without a turbulent display on the part of some, whereas in Upper Germany
the two legions (iv and xxii) which were quartered at Moguntiacum (Mainz)
broke in pieces the images of Galba; cf. Plut. Galb. 22, τὰς μὲν εἰκόνας τοῦ
Γάλβα προσελθόντες ἀνέτρεψαν καὶ κατέσπασαν, αὐτοὶ δ᾽ ὀμόσαντες ὑπὲρ συγκλήτου
(senatus) καὶ δήμου ῾Ῥωμαίων διελύθησαν.
sacramento: for the oath of fealty to the emperor and its renewal
at certain times see on c. 11.
in nomen senatus: cf. c. 10, 1. Tacitus (i 55) observes that such a
form of words was so long disused that it had become meaningless: ac ne
reverentiam imperii exuere viderentur, senatus populique Romani oblitterata
iam nomina sacramento advocabant: c. 56, in senatus ac populi Romani
verba iurasse, id sacramentum inane visum.
praetorianos: the various occasions on which the praetorians played
the part of "king-makers" are collected by Cagnat (Daremberg-Saglio, iv
632 sqq.). Caligula's death was due to them, and on the next day they
saluted Claudius as emperor; Nero was recognised by them, and the
senate conformed to their decision; they support Galba, and then desert
him for Otho; they overthrow Domitian and choose Nerva; Marcus Aurelius
and Verus on their adoption hasten to secure the support of the praetorians
by a largess of 20,000 sesterces to each; they plot the death of Commodus;
they elevate Pertinax to the throne, and in 87 days put him to death;
they auction the Roman empire to Didius Julianus, who promised to each
of them 6,250 denarii. Septimius Severus (193-211 A.D.) dealt sternly
with them and reorganised them, but they soon recovered their dominant
influence in state affairs. They put to death Maximus and Balbinus, and
hailed Gordian III as emperor (238 A.D.); to them Maxentius, the predecessor of Constantine, applied to be saluted as Augustus. They were
finally disbanded by Constantine in 312 A.D.
displicere imperatorem in Hispania factum: the jealousy felt by the
troops in Germany at the elevation of Galba by those in Spain is illustrated
by the words of one of the mutineers in Upper Germany urging the selection
of Vitellius, the commander in the Lower province: “φέρε, τοῦτον ἑλόμενοι
δείξωμεν ἀνθρώποις πᾶσιν ὡς Ἰβήρων καὶ Λυσιτανῶν ἀμείνους ἐσμὲν αὐτοκράτορα
αἱρεῖσθαι.” (Plut. Galb. 22). Galba's proclamation as emperor by the 6th
legion in Spain disclosed what Tacitus calls a "constitutional secret," that
an emperor could be made elsewhere than at Rome (H. i 4, evolgato imperii
arcano, posse principem alibi quam Romae fieri).
eligerent: Tacitus (H. i 12) says that the Germanic legions left the
““arbitrium eligendi" to the senate and Roman people; but the senate, of
course, could merely ratify the choice made by the praetorians.
CHAPTER 17.
nuntiatum est: by a despatch from Pompeius Propinquus, procurator
of Gallia Belgica; see Tac. H. i 12 quoted on c. 16, 2.
despectui esse: despectus in Caesar (and Lucretius) is used in the
sense of a "view downwards"; it is once used for an "object of con-
tempt' in Rhet. Her. 1v 39, 51, filii parvi
ludibrio et despectui paternis
inimicis erunt oppositi; in post-Aug. prose it is used both for "contempt"
and "object of contempt" (in this latter sense only in dat., as here and
Tac. H. iv 57, non adeo turbatam rem Romanam ut Treveris etiam
despectui sit). Cf. contemptui, despicatui, esse, habere, ducere. Cicero
has despicientia despising," "contempt."
orbitatem: Plut. Galb. 19, ὁ δὲ (Γάλβας) φοβηθείς, ὡς μὴ μόνον διὰ τὸ γῆρας,
ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τὴν ἀπαιδίαν καταφρονούμενος, ἐβουλεύετο παῖδα θέσθαι (“adopt ") τῶν
ἐπιφανῶν τινα νεανίσκον καὶ διάδοχον ἀποδεῖξαι τῆς ἀρχῆς: Tac. H. ii 1 materia
sermonibus senium et orbitas principis et intemperantia civitatis, donec
unus eligatur, multos destinandi.
Pisonem Frugi Licinianum: the full name was Lucius Calpurnius Piso
Frugi Licinianus. He was son of M. Licinius Crassus Frugi (cons. 27 A.D.)
and Scribonia, a granddaughter of Sex. Pompeius. Of his three brothers
one was put to death by Claudius, one by Nero, and the third, Licinius
Crassus Scribonianus, refused the empire when it was offered to him by
Antonius Primus (Tac. H. iv 39). Born in 38, he was for long exiled by
Nero (Tac. i 48) and so held no magistracies at Rome. He only survived
his adoption by Galba for four days, as he was dragged from the temple
of Vesta and murdered by Otho's soldiers at the time when Galba was
slain.
egregium iuvenem: Plutarch (Galb. 23) describes him as “veavíaς ἐν τῇ
πρὸς πᾶσαν ἀρετὴν εὐφυΐᾳ τὸ κόσμιον καὶ αὐστηρὸν ἐμφανέστατα ἔχων,” “a young
man whose self-control and austerity were the most conspicuous traits in
a character naturally inclined to every virtue"; cf. Tac. H. i 14, vultu
habituque moris antiqui et aestimatione recta severus, deterius interpretantibus tristior habebatur: Dio lxiv 5, νεανίσκος εὐγενής, ἐπιεικής, φρόνιμος.
testamento: Tacitus and Plutarch make no mention of Piso's having
been named as heir in Galba's will. Dessau (Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit ii 1,
313) regards Suetonius' statement here as quite unreliable.
semper: Bentley's insuper may be right; Cornelissen suggested nuper.
If genuine, semper means that Galba never altered his will in the way, for
example, that Julius Caesar did; cf. Iul. 83, where we learn that Caesar,
from his first consulship to the beginning of the civil war, was wont to
write down Cn. Pompeius as his heir and to read this to the assembled
soldiers; in his last will, however, he named three other heirs, and at the
end of the will adopted Gaius Octavius into his family and gave him his
name (in familiam nomenque adoptavit).
..
in bona et nomen adscitum: cf. Claud. 39, 2, (Claudius) adsciturus in
nomen Neronem; Tac. H. i 15, Crassi subolem (i.e. Piso Licinianus) in
penates meos adsciscere: A. iii 30, Crispum C. Sallustius
in nomen
adscivit. For the so-called adoption by will, which was really appointment
of heir with direction to bear testator's name, see Roby, Roman Private
Law, i 59 n. After his adoption as Galba's successor, Piso's name seems
to have been Servius Sulpicius Galba Caesar; on Jan. 10, the day of his
adoption, the Fratres Arvales sacrificed "[ob adoptione[m Ser. Sulpici
Gal]bae C[aesaris]'' (Henzen, Acta Fratr. Arv. xci).
repente adprehendit: this account differs from that in Tac. H. i 14
where we are told that Galba, having decided to adopt a successor, held a
"council for the election of an emperor (comitia imperii)" at which were
present Vinius, Laco, Marius Celsus (consul designate) and Ducenius
Geminus (prefect of the city). Galba, after a few remarks on his advanced
years, ordered Piso to be summoned "seu propria electione sive, ut quidam
crediderunt, Lacone instigante." Galba knew that some of his friends
would have preferred Otho or Dolabella (for whom see c. 12, 2) to Piso;
Vinius was for Otho; Laco and Icelus were agreed, not in supporting any
particular individual, but in opposing the nominee of Vinius (Tac., c. 13).
Plutarch, Galb. 23, says that Galba without a word beforehand suddenly
sent for Piso (ἄφνω μηδὲν προειπὼν μετεπέμψατο Πείσωνα) and went down with
him to the camp to announce him as "Caesar" and as his successor.
pro contione adoptavit: in presence of the assembled soldiers in the
praetorian camp; Tac. H. i 18, apud frequentem militum contionem imperatoria brevitate adoptari a se Pisonem exemplo divi Augusti et more
militari quo vir virum legeret, pronuntiat. Galba had previously discussed
the advisability of making the announcement in this way or from the
Rostra to the assembled people or in the Curia to the senate: Tас. с. 17,
consultatum inde, pro Rostris an in senatu an in castris adoptio nuncuparetur. Iri in castra placuit: honorificum id militibus fore, quorum
favorem ut largitione et ambitu male adquiri, ita per bonas artes haud
spernendum. Augustus adopted Gaius and Lucius (Suet. Aug. 64, 65) and
Claudius adopted Nero (Tac. A. xii 26) in the ordinary method prescribed
by law, but Galba adopted Piso, not "lege curiata apud pontifices, ut moris
est" (Tac. H. i 15), but by mere public declaration (nuncupatio pro
contione); Nerva did the same in the case of Trajan (Dio lxviii 3), and
this method was probably continued by later emperors (Mommsen, Staatsr.
if³ 1137 sq.).
ne donativi mentione facta: Plutarch (Galb. 23) describes the
"festering" discontent of the sullen soldiers when no largess was given:
ἦν δὲ καὶ τὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὕπουλα καὶ σκυθρωπὰ μηδὲ τότε δωρεᾶς αὐτοῖς δοθείσης.
Tacitus too says that a little liberality on Galba's part would have gained
for him the soldiers: constat potuisse conciliari animos quantulacumque
parci senis liberalitate; nocuit antiquus rigor et nimia severitas, cui iam
pares non sumus. It was usual to distribute a donativum when the emperor
made an adoption, e.g. when Hadrian adopted Verus (Spart. Hadr. 23).
faciliorem occasionem praebuit: see Plut. c. 24 for the ease with which
the agents of Otho by bribes and promises won over the soldiers who were
already rotten" with disaffection and only looking for a pretext (ἤδη
σαθροὺς ὄντας καὶ δεομένους προφάσεως).
intra sextum adoptionis diem: Piso was adopted on Jan. 10 and Galba
was slain on Jan. 15, which was the sixth day after, according to the
Roman inclusive method of reckoning; so Plut. (l.c.) ἕκτῃ γὰρ ἀνῃρέθησαν (i.e.
Galba and Piso were slain), ἣν ἄγουσι Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸ δεκαοκτὼ καλανδῶν Φεβρουαρίων
(= ante diem octavum decimum kalendas Februarias). Tacitus says that
Piso was 'quadriduo Caesar'" (H. i 48).
Instead of a clause with quam after ante, post, intra, we find at times
in post-Aug. authors a genitive depending on the accusative after these
prepositions; e.g. Claud. 27, 1, ante quintum mensem divortii: Tac. A. i 62,
sextum post cladis annum: id. H. ii 70, intra quadragesimum pugnae diem:
Vell. Pat. i 10, 5, ante paucos triumphi dies. Already in class. Lat. we
have post diem tertium eius diei, Cic. Att. iii 7, 1, Tusc. i 114 (see KühnerStegmann, i 405). Suetonius also uses quam, e.g. Iul. 35, 2, intra quintum
quam adfuerat diem (so in Liv., etc.).
CHAPTER 18.
monstra exitum portenderant: an enumeration of the omens and
prodigies foreboding the death of a Caesar is characteristic of the Lives;
cf. Iul. 81, Aug. 97, Tib. 74, Calig. 57, Claud. 46, Ner. 46, Oth. 8, Vitell. 9,
Vesp. 23, Tit. 10, Dom. 15. See Introd. c. ii.
per omne iter: the whole length of his march from Spain to Rome to
assume the empire.
dextra sinistraque
victimae caederentur: cf. Calig. 13 (Caligula's
journey from Misenum to Rom, on his accession), inter altaria et victimas
ardentesque taedas densissimo et laetissimo obviorum agmine incessit:
Curt. v 1, 20 (Alexander's entry into Babylon), Plures obviam egressi sunt
inter quos Bagophanes, arcis et regiae pecuniae custos,
totum iter
floribus coronisque constraverat, argenteis altaribus utroque latere dispositis,
quae non ture modo, sed omnibus odoribus cumulaverat : Tac. H. ii 70
(Vitellius visits the battlefield of Betriacum), Nec minus inhumana pars
viae quam Cremonenses lauru rosaque constraverant, extructis altaribus
caesisque victimis regium in morem: Appian Bell. Civ. v 24 (the coming
to Rome of Octavian and Antonius after peace had been made between
them), παροδεύουσιν αὐτοῖς, οἷα σωτῆρσιν, ἐγίγνοντο θυσίαι. See also Hirt. Bell.
Gall. viii 51. Such honours, as Casaubon says, were originally paid to the
gods when their statues were moved from one place to another (cf. Cic.
Verr. iv 35).
=
oppidatim:
per oppida, κατὰ πόλεις. This adv., used also in Aug. 59,
is not cited from any other author. For the remarkable number of adverbs
in -im used by Suetonius see App. I. § 1. f.
securis: the larger victims were usually slain by an axe (securis,
dolabra) or hammer (malleus); sheep, pigs, and birds had their throats cut
with a knife (culter).
rupto vinculo: a victim's breaking away from the altar was a sure
portent of disaster; see on Tit. 10, 1. Cf. Amm. Marc. xxiv 6, 17 (describing a portent of Julian's approaching end), conplures hostias Marti
parabat ultori, et ex tauris pulcherrimis decem ad hoc perductis, nondum
aris admoti voluntate sua novem procubuere tristissimi, decimus vero, qui
diffractis vinculis lapsus aegre reductus est, mactatus ominosa signa
monstravit.
speculator: these speculatores were picked soldiers (lancers) of the
praetorian cohorts who formed a special bodyguard for the emperor at
Rome, on journeys, and on military expeditions; cf. Claud. 35, 1, neque
convivia inire ausus est (Claudius) nisi ut speculatores cum lanceis circumstarent: Tac. H. ii 11, ipsum Othonem comitabantur speculatorum lecta
corpora cum ceteris praetoriis cohortibus, etc. They are distinct from the
speculatores legionum of whom each legion had ten, acting as despatchbearers, etc. Marquardt (Staatsv. ii² 547) and Cauer (Eph. Epigr. iv 464)
hold that they were, at least during the first cent., formed into a special
corps, a mounted corps, under special officers, and distinct from the rest of
the praetorians. On the other hand, von Domaszewski (Die Religion des
röm. Heeres p. 94) thinks that the speculatores always formed an integral
part of the praetorian cohorts; each cohort contained 24 of them (Tac.
H. i 27, 31, 35), and as the cohorts were 12 in number, the total number of
speculatores was 288, or roughly 300. See Daremberg-Saglio, iv 637;
Smilda on Suet. Claud. 35.
Palatium: see on Vesp. 25.
terrae tremor: cf. Ner. 48, 2 (describing Nero's last flight from Rome),
statim tremore terrae et fulgure adverso pavefactus. ‘“terrae tremor” for
“terrae motus" (Vesp. 17) is a poetical expression used in post-Aug. prose.
assimilis mugitui sonus: cf. Amm. Marc. xvii 7, 14, inter haec tria
genera terrae motuum mycematiae (mycematias, μυκηματιάς, is a rumbling
earthquake) sonitu audiuntur minaci, cum dissolutis elementa compagibus
ultro absiliunt vel relabuntur concidentibus terris; tunc enim necesse est
velut taurinis reboare mugitibus fragores fremitusque terrenos: Sen.
N.Q. vi 13, 4, antequam terra moveatur, solet mugitus audiri ventis in
abdito tumultuantibus; nec enim aliter posset, ut ait noster Vergilius
(Aen. vì 256), “sub pedibus mugire solum et iuga celsa moveri,” nisi hoc
esset ventorum opus.
§ 2. monile margaritis gemmisque consertum: among the presents
lavished by Caligula on the pampered horse Incitatus (which he once
thought of making consul) were “monilia e gemmis” (Calig. 55, 3). For
the adornment of the statues of goddesses with jewelry cf. Plin. N.H. ix
121, where we are told that the second of the two famous pearls from the
earrings of Cleopatra (the companion to that which she dissolved in vinegar
and drank) was cut in two to serve as pendants for the ears of Venus in the
Pantheon at Rome. Julius Caesar dedicated to Venus Genetrix (in the
temple which he built for her in the Forum Iulium) a breastplate (thorax)
made of British pearls (Plin. N.H. ix 116, Solin. 54).
Fortunam suam Tusculanam: for the story of this image of Fortune,
which he treasured in his villa at Tusculum, see c. 4, 3.
quasi: causal, see on Tit. 8, 1.
Capitolinae Veneri: Suetonius mentions a temple of the Capitoline
Venus in Calig. 7, where he says that Livia dedicated there a statue of a
son of Germanicus in the guise of Cupid (effigiem habitu Cupidinis in aede
Capitolinae Veneris Livia dedicavit). There is no other reference to this
temple, which some would identify with the shrine (or altar) of Venus
Victrix on the Capitol (C.I.L. i² p. 245). Jordan (Topogr. Rom і 2, 42)
says that there is nothing definite known of any other temple of Venus on
the Capitol besides that of Venus Eryciną, vowed in 217 B.C. by Q. Fabius
Maximus after the battle of Trasimenus and dedicated by him in 215.
Platner and Ashby, Topogr. Dict. Rome p. 551, regard it as "altogether
probable" that this is the aedes Capitolina Veneris.
somniavit: see on c. 4, 3.
speciem: phantom" (= simulacrum, εἴδωλον) cf. Ner. 34, 4, saepe
confessus exagitari se materna specie: Calig. 50, inter ceteras (imagines
noctis) pelagi quondam speciem colloquentem secum videre visus: Claud.
1, 2; 37, 2: Aug. 96, 1. This poetical use of species is found in prose
from Livy on.
quae dedisset: sc. imperium.
ad expiandum somnium: cf. Petron. Satyr. 114, ut Lycas Tryphaenae
somnium expiavit; Mart. xi 50, 8, expiet ut somnos garrula saga tuos.
Sacrifice was one method adopted to avert the evil portended by bad dreams;
the offering of salted cakes (salsae molae) and incense (tus) is often
mentioned, e.g. Plaut. Amph. 740, sed, mulier, postquam experrecta es, te
prodigiali Iovi | aut mola salsa hodie aut ture conprecatam oportuit;
Tibull. i 5, 14, Ipse procuravi ne possent saeva nocere | somnia ter sancta
deveneranda mola. Another method was lustration in running water, e.g.
Pers. ii 16, noctem flumine purgas; Sil. Ital. viii 124, sub lucem ut visa
secundent | oro caelicolas ac vivo purgor in amni.
nihil invenit merum: everything was the direct opposite of what
it should have been for a successful sacrifice: the fire should have been
blazing; the attendants on the sacrificing priest should have been young
(like the camilli) and robed in white; the incense should have been carried
in an ornate incense box (acerra); the wine should have been poured from
a patera, which at this period was usually of silver or gold and richly
wrought.
catino: from this glass dish or bowl the grains of incense would be
thrown on to the fire-pan or brasier (cf. Rich 125, where a similar vessel of
agate is illustrated). A catinus (or catinum) of black earthenware (like
the black Etruscan pottery) was used at primitive sacrifices in the days
of Numa; cf. Juv. vi 343, simpuvium (“libation-ladle'") ridere Numae
nigrumque catinum: Apul. Mag. 18, eadem paupertas etiam populo Romano
imperium a primordio fundavit, proque eo in hodiernum diis immortalibus
simpulo et catino fictili sacrificat. For the various uses of the catinus see
Pauly-Wissowa, iii 1790.
tus: the MSS. give thus, but in the other three passages where the
word occurs they give the forms ture and tura, and Ihm restores tus here.
$ 3. coronam de capite excidisse: another portent of dire disaster; cf.
Sil. Ital. xvi 268 (when Syphax was sacrificing), Vittaque, maiorum decoramen, fronte sine ullo | delapsa adtactu, nudavit tempora regis. | Talia
caelicolae casuro tristia regno | signa dabant, saevique aderant gravia
omina fati; Sen. Thyest. 701 (when Atreus, like a sacrificing priest, slays
the children of Thyestes), regium capiti decus (i.e. his diadem) | bis terque
lapsum est. When Vitellius set out from Germany on his march to Rome,
the laurel wreath which he had donned fell into a stream (Vitell. 9);
Alexander's death was foreshadowed by his diadem being blown from his
head by the wind near Babylon (App. Syr. 56).
auspicanti pullos avolasse: omens were derived from the appetite of
birds, generally chickens (pulli, hence auspicia pullaria used for such omens).
The chickens were kept in a coop (cavea), and if a general or magistrate
wished to get omens from them, they were let out and food was thrown to
them, the pullarii drawing various conclusions from the degree of eagerness
which they showed in eating, the most favourable sign (solistimum tripudium) being when they ate so greedily that some of the grain fell from
their bills to the ground. Any attempt on the part of the birds to fly away
was most inauspicious, and this was among the warning signs given to
C. Hostilius Mancinus (cons. 137 B.C.) when starting on his disastrous
campaign in the Numantine war in Spain: Val. Max. i 6, 7, cum Lavinii
sacrificium facere vellet (Mancinus), pulli cavea emissi in proximam silvam
fugerunt, summaque diligentia quaesiti reperiri nequiverunt. Claudius
Pulcher began a sea-fight off Sicily (249 B.C.) though the sacred chickens
would not eat, throwing them into the sea in defiance of the omen, and
saying that they might drink since they would not eat (Suet. Tib. 2, 2).
adoptionis die: the adoption of Piso (c. 17) on Jan. 10, 69 A.D.
Suetonius says nothing of the boding storm of rain and thunder accompanying the adoption, which is described in Tac. H. i 18 and Plut. Galb.
23. Tacitus adds 'observatum id antiquitus comitiis dirimendis non terruit
Galbam, quo minus in castra pergeret, contemptorem talium, ut fortuitorum,
seu, quae fato manent, quamvis significata, non vitantur.” Plutarch says
it was manifest that heaven disapproved of the ill-omened adoption.
castrensem sellam: the "campstool” placed for the commander-inchief on the tribunal from which he delivered his harangue to the troops;
it resembled the ordinary sella curulis but was less elaborate; the sella
curulis was a folding chair without back or arms and with legs curved like
pincers, while the sella castrensis had straight legs; the seat was of
straps covered with a cushion (see the illustrations in Daremberg-Saglio
iv 1180; Smith Dict. Ant. ii³ 620). Like modern campstools, the sella
curulis gave way at times and the occupant came ignominiously to the
ground; this happened to Augustus at the games on the dedication of the
theatre of Marcellus: evenit ut laxatis sellae curulis compagibus caderet
supinus (Aug. 43, 5).
curulem: when the emperor appeared in the senate he sat between the
consuls and, like them, on a raised sella curulis; see Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³
936. This seat was first assigned to Augustus in 19 B.с. (Dio liv 10).
The adj. curulis is for * currulis from currus a chariot, this explanation
being given in Gell. iii 18 on the authority of Gavius Bassus, “senatores
enim dicit in veterum aetate, qui curulem magistratum gessissent, curru
solitos honoris gratia in curiam vehi, in quo curru sella esset, super quam
considerent, quae ob eam causam‘curulis' appellatur.”
perverse: this perhaps means “back to the front," though there is no
means of determining what difference there was between the back and the
front of a sella curulis; another possible meaning is "askew” “sideways,"
and so La Harpe renders it "de travers.”
CHAPTER 19.
sacrificantem: this was the sacrifice at which Otho was present (see
Oth. 6) and, as Plutarch says, was almost delivered up to Galba by the
hand of the gods: Galb. 24, ἐκείνῃ (τῇ ἡμέρᾳ) γὰρ ἕωθεν εὐθὺς ὁ μὲν Γάλβας ἔθυεν
ἐν Παλατίῳ τῶν φίλων παρόντων, ὁ δὲ θύτης Ὀμβρίκιος ἅμα τῷ λαβεῖν εἰς τὰς χεῖρας
τοῦ ἱερείου τὰ σπλάγχνα καὶ προσιδεῖν οὐ δι' αἰνιγμῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄντικρυς ἔφη σημεῖα
μεγάλης ταραχῆς καὶ μετὰ δόλου κίνδυνον ἐκ κεφαλῆς ἐπικείμενον τῷ αὐτοκράτορι,
μονονουχὶ τὸν Ὄθωνα τοῦ θεοῦ χειρὶ ληπτὸν παραδιδόντος. Cf. also Dio lxiv 5; Tac.
H. i 27, Octavo decimo kalendas Februarias (i.e. Jan. 15) sacrificanti
pro aede Apollinis Galbae haruspex Umbricius tristia exta et instantes
insidias ac domesticum hostem praedicit, audiente Othone (nam proximus
adstiterat) idque ut laetum e contrario et suis cogitationibus prosperum
interpretante. The way in which Otho escaped from his dangerous predicament and was carried off to the camp to be proclaimed emperor is described
in Oth. 6.
haruspex: 'soothsayer," lit. 'entrail-observer" (root ghar, cf. hirae,
hillae, ilia, χόλιξ), one who foretold the future from the appearance of the
entrails of the sacrifice. This was an Etruscan form of divination.
Victims sacrificed for this purpose were called hostiae consultatoriae;
ordinary sacrificial victims were called hostiae animales.
haud multo post: Tacitus says that it was while Galba was still
keeping on sacrificing and importuning the gods of an empire no longer his:
ignarus interim Galba et sacris intentus fatigabat alieni iam imperii deos,
cum affertur rumor rapi in castra incertum quem senatorem, mox Othonem
esse qui raperetur; simul ex tota urbe, ut quisque obvius fuerat, alii formidine augentes, quidam minora vero, ne tum quidem obliti adulationis (H.
i 29). So too Plutarch (Galb. 25) says that the soothsayer still held the
entrails in his hands when the news arrived which dumbfounded even those
who had been sceptical of the truth of such presages.
cognoscit: this is one of the few instances of the historic present in
Suetonius: see Appendix I. § 9. a.
castra: the castra praetoria (praetoriana Suet.) or permanent camp for
the praetorian cohorts was an institution of Tiberius on the advice of
Sejanus in 23 A.D.; cf. Tib. 37, 1, Romae castra constituit, quibus praetorianae cohortes, vagae ante id tempus et per hospitia dispersae, continerentur: Aug. 49, 1, numquam plures quam tres cohortes in urbe passus
est (Augustus), easque sine castris. It lay to the N.E. of Rome, outside
the Servian agger, between the Viminal and Colline gates, and so commanded the important roads (Salaria, Nomentana, Tiburtina) leading
eastward. For a description of it see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Romi
3, 385 sqq. and the plan in Daremberg-Saglio iv 634. It figures largely in
the history of the Empire from Claudius to Vespasian, and is mentioned in
Tac. A. iv 2, xi 31, xii 69, xiii 14, xv 53, 59; H. i 31, ii 93, iii 84, etc.
1
ut eodem pergeret suadentibus: Tacitus (H. i 32 sq.) mentions the two
courses of action suggested to Galba, one advocated by Vinius, the other
by Laco and Icelus: Interim Galbam duae sententiae distinebant. Titus
Vinius manendum intra domum, opponenda servitia, firmandos aditus, non
eundum ad iratos censebat
Festinandum ceteris videbatur, antequam
cresceret invalida adhuc coniuratio paucorum
Vel si cadere necesse sit,
occurrendum discrimini; id Othoni invidiosius et ipsis honestum.
...
nihil amplius quam: see on ‘“nihil aliud quam,” Dom. 21.
continere se statuit: Suetonius here differs from Tacitus (H. i 34)
who says that Galba decided to follow the advice of his more plausible
supporters to go out and face the mutinous soldiery, and that he sent Piso
(his adopted son) in advance to the praetorian camp, as being likely to
gain the favour of the cohorts by his great name and popularity, and by
his hostility to Vinius whom the soldiers hated. Plutarch (Galb. 25) agrees
in the main with the account of Tacitus.
legionariorum: Nero's legion “prima Adiutrix classicorum” (see on
c. 12, 2) was at Rome; also chosen contingents from the armies of Germany,
Britain, and Illyricum, which Nero had prepared to send against the
Albani but had recalled on the revolt of Vindex (Tac. H. i 6). The legion
which Galba had recruited in Spain (“septima Galbiana," see c. 10, 2),
and which had accompanied him to Rome, had been despatched to Pannonia
(Тас. Н. ii 11).
multifariam: see on "plurifariam,” Vitell. 9.
tendebant: "were quartered" (c. 12, 2, n.). The contingent of the
Illyrian army was quartered at this time in the Porticus Vipsania (in the
Campus Martius), and the contingent of the German army in the Atrium
Libertatis (near the Circus Flaminius ?); see Tac. H. i 31.
loricam linteam induit: sumpto thorace, Tac. c. 35; τεθωρακισμένος,
Plut. c. 27. A cuirass or corselet of linen is frequently mentioned in Greek
writers. In Homer the epithet λινοθώρηξ is applied to the Locrian Ajax
and the Mysian Amphios (Il. ii 529, 830), and a linen cuirass was worn
by the Persians (Xen. Cyrop. vi 4, 2), Egyptians (Hdt. ii 182), Phoenicians
(Paus. vi 19, 4), and Chalybes (Xen. Anab. iv 7, 15); cf. also Arr. Tact. 14.
Nepos (Iphicr. 1) says of Iphicrates: genus loricarum mutavit, et pro
sertis atque aeneis linteas dedit; quo facto expeditiores milites reddidit:
nam, pondere detracto, quod aeque corpus tegeret et leve esset, curavit.
Pausanias (i 21, 8) says that these cuirasses made of folds of linen were
of little use in war, though a protection in hunting: οἱ δὲ θώρακες οἱ λινοῖ
μαχομένοις μὲν οὐχ ὁμοίως εἰσὶ χρήσιμοι, διϊᾶσι γὰρ καὶ βιαζόμενοι τὸν σίδηρον,
θηρεύοντας δὲ ὠφελοῦσιν, ἐναποκλῶνται γάρ σφισι καὶ λεόντων ὀδόντες καὶ παρδάλεων.
Casaubon cites from the Byzantine historian Nicetas Acominatus (c. 1190
A.D.) a description of a linen cuirass worn by Conrad; it was made with
eighteen folds and stiffened by steeping in vinegar and salt so as to be
impenetrable by any weapon.
quanquam: see on Tit. 7, 2.
§ 2. rumoribus falsis: there was a widespread rumour that Otho had
been slain: Tac. H. i 34, vixdum egresso Pisone occisum in castris
Othonem vagus primum et incertus rumor: mox, ut in magnis mendaciis,
interfuisse se quidam et vidisse adfirmabant, credula fama inter gaudentes
et incuriosos: Plut. Galb. 26, θροῦς διῆλθε πολύς, ὡς ἀνῃρημένου τοῦ Οθωνος.
conspirati: the use of conspirati as a subst. (= coniurati) is first found
in Suetonius; cf. Iul. 82, 1: Dom. 17, 1.
de industria dissiparant: Tac. (l.c.), Multi arbitrabantur compositum
auctumque rumorem mixtis iam Othonianis, qui ad evocandum Galbam laeta
falso volgaverint.
..
paucis affirmantibus: Tacitus says that everyone kept making
positive assertions, though no one knew anything definite: nemo scire et
omnes adfirmare.
gratulabundos: this rare adj. occurs first in Liv. vii 33; see on
“osculabundus,” Vitell. 2, 5. Tacitus (c. 35) describes the crowd of
all classes flocking to the Palace to congratulate Galba on the reported
death of Otho: Tum vero non populus tantum et imperita plebs in plausus
et inmodica studia, sed equitum plerique et senatorum, posito metu incauti,
refractis Palatii foribus ruere intus ac se Galbae ostentare, praereptam
sibi ultionem querentes, ignavissimus quisque et, ut res docuit, in periculo
non ausurus, nimii verbis, linguae feroces.
prodiit: he was carried in a sella (φορεῖor) on account of the throng.
Quo auctore?: this question was a proof of Galba's intrepidity in
checking indiscipline; cf. Tac. (l. c.): Obvius in Palatio Iulius Atticus
speculator (see note on c. 18, 1) cruentum gladium ostentans occisum a se
Othonem exclamavit; et Galba “commilito,” inquit, “quis iussit?”
insigni animo ad coercendam militarem licentiam, minitantibus intrepidus,
adversus blandientes incorruptus. Dio (lxiv 6) supplies a version of the
soldier's words as he showed the bloodstained sword: “Θάρσει, αὐτοκράτορ,
Οθωνα γὰρ ἀπέκτεινα, καὶ ἔστι σοι δεινὸν ἔτι οὐδέν.” πιστεύσας οὖν ὁ Γάλβας πρὸς
μὲν ἐκεῖνον εἶπε “Καὶ τίς σοι τοῦτο ποιῆσαι ἐκέλευσεν;” Plutarch (Galb. 26)
adds that the soldier, a distinguished praetorian, replied to Galba that
it was his oath of allegiance which bade him do the deed (τοῦ δὲ ἀνθρώπου
τὴν πίστιν εἰπόντος καὶ τὸν ὅρκον, κ.τ.λ.).
processit: Bentley needlessly conjectured processerit.
equites equos adegissent: Tacitus (c. 40) gives a vivid account
of the charge into the Forum which was ordered by Otho when he heard
that Galba's supporters were arming the mob: Othoni tamen armari
plebem nuntiabatur. Ire praecipites et occupare ("forestall'') pericula
iubet. Igitur milites Romani, quasi Vologaesum aut Pacorum avito
Arsacidarum solio depulsuri ac non imperatorem suum inermem et senem
trucidare pergerent, disiecta plebe, proculcato senatu, truces armis, rapidi
equis Forum irrumpunt. Nec illos Capitolii aspectus et imminentium
templorum religio et priores et futuri principes terruere, quo minus facerent
scelus, cuius ultor est quisquis successit.
paganorum: paganus (“rustic" or "peasant") is used at times in
Silver Latin for a "civilian"; cf. Aug. 27, 3, concionante se, admissa
turba paganorum, apud milites: Juv. xvi 32, citius falsum producere
testem | contra paganum possis, quam vera loquentem | contra fortunam
armati contraque pudorem: Tac. H. iii 24 (Antonius Primus rouses the
praetorians with the taunt "vos, nisi vincitis, pagani"): i 53, inter
paganos corruptior miles.
restiterunt: this momentary halt on the part of Otho's attacking
force is not mentioned by other writers. Plutarch (c. 26) says that the
standard-bearer of the cohort accompanying Galba dashed to the ground
the medallion of the emperor which was attached to the standard of the
cohort, and at once the litter of Galba was attacked, first with javelins
and then with swords; cf. Tac. (c. 41): Viso comminus armatorum agmine
(i.e. Otho's troops) vexillarius comitatae Galbam cohortis dereptam
Galbae imaginem solo adflixit. Eo signo manifesta in Othonem omnium
militum studia, desertum fuga populi Forum, destricta adversus dubitantes
tela.
desertum a suis: see on c. 20, 1, neque praesentium quemquam opem
imperatori ferre conatum.
CHAPTER 20.
sunt qui tradant: there were various reports, friendly or otherwise,
of the last words of Galba; cf. Tac. H. i 41, Extremam eius vocem, ut
cuique odium aut admiratio fuit, varie prodidere: alii suppliciter interrogasse quid mali meruisset, paucos dies exsolvendo donativo deprecatum;
plures obtulisse ultro percussoribus iugulum: agerent ac ferirent, si ita e
re publica videretur (Tacitus cynically adds "Non interfuit occidentium
quid diceret"): Dio lxiv 6, τοῦτο μόνον εἰπών, “ Καὶ τί κακὸν ἐποίησα;”:
Plut. Galb. 27, ὁ δὲ τὴν σφαγὴν (iugulum) προτείνας ‘“ Δρᾶτε” εἶπεν “εἰ τοῦτο τῷ
δήμῳ ῾Ῥωμαίων ἄμεινόν ἐστι."
Quid agitis
mei: these words form a trochaic septenarius
(CCC-II-IC-II-CCI-II-I( - -) and seem to be a poetical
quotation.
donativum etiam pollicitum: Tacitus (l.c.) mentions this reported
offer, but Plutarch and Dio say nothing of it. Galba had persistently
refused to grant a donativum; see c. 16, 1, and c. 17.
ut hoc agerent: “agere" in the ritual of Roman sacrifice meant to
slay the victim; the slayer (popa) before striking the blow asked the
priest "Agone?”, “Shall I do it?", and he replied "Age” or “Hoc
age"; cf. Ov. F. i 321, qui calido strictos tincturus sanguine cultros |
semper agatne rogat, nec nisi iussus agit. This reply of the priest to the
popa was a warning to the assembled people to keep silence and give
attention to the solemn act; hence "hoc age" came to be used colloquially
meaning "give attention." Suetonius uses it again in the sacrificial
sense in Calig. 58, 2 (describing the assassination of Caligula by Chaerea):
tradunt Chaeream cervicem gladio caesim graviter perculisse praemissa
voce "Hoc age!”
..
neque quemquam opem ferre conatum: both Plutarch and Dio
mention with great praise a centurion Sempronius Densus, who singlehanded made a gallant effort to protect Galba: Plut. Galb. 26, ῎Ημυνε δὲ οὐδεὶς
οὐδὲ ὑπέστη πλὴν ἑνὸς ἀνδρός, ὃν μόνον ἥλιος ἐπεῖδεν ἐν μυριάσι τοσαύταις ἄξιον τῆς
Ῥωμαίων ἡγεμονίας· Σεμπρώνιος ἦν Δῆνσος ἑκατοντάρχης, οὐδὲν ἰδίᾳ χρηστὸν ὑπὸ
Γάλβᾳ πεπονθώς, τῷ δὲ καλῷ καὶ τῷ νόμῳ βοηθῶν προέστη τοῦ φορείου (“litter"). Καὶ
τὸ κλῆμα (i.e. the vitis, or vine-switch carried by centurions) πρῶτον . . ἐπαράμενος
τοῖς ἐπιφερομένοις ἐβόα καὶ διεκελεύετο φείδεσθαι τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος. Ἔπειτα συμπλεκ
ομένων αὐτῷ σπασάμενος τὸ ξίφος ἠμύνατο πολὺν χρόνον, ἕως τυφθεὶς τὰς ἰγνύας
("knee-joints") ἔπεσε: Dio lxiv 6, καὶ αὐτῷ Σεμπρώνιος Δῆνσος ἑκατόνταρχος ἐπαμύνας
ἐς ὅσον ἠδυνήθη, τέλος, ὡς οὐδὲν ἤνυσεν, ἐπεσφάγη. καὶ διὰ τοῦτό γε καὶ τὸ ὄνομα
αὐτοῦ ἐνέγραψα, ὅτι ἀξιώτατός ἐστι μνημονεύεσθαι. Tacitus, however, says that
Sempronius showed this gallantry in defending Piso (Galba's adopted
son), to whom he had been attached as a guard by Galba: Insignem illa
die virum Sempronium Densum aetas nostra vidit. Centurio is praetoriae
cohortis, a Galba custodiae Pisonis additus, stricto pugione occurrens
armatis et scelus exprobrans ac modo manu modo voce vertendo in se percussores quanquam vulnerato Pisoni effugium dedit. Piso sought sanctuary
in the temple of Vesta, but Otho's soldiers dragged him out and slew him.
omnes qui arcesserentur: Galba had sent Celsus Marius to try and
bring to his support the contingent of the Illyrian army quartered in the
Porticus Agrippa; two centurions of the first rank (primipilares) were
ordered to bring up the German soldiers quartered in the Atrium Libertatis
(see on c. 19, 1). No confidence could be placed in Nero's legion "prima
Adiutrix classicorum” which was incensed by Galba's massacre of their
comrades (see on c. 12, 2). Three military tribunes were sent to the
camp of the praetorians in a vain effort to recall them from the side of
Otho. The Illyrian detachments drove Celsus away with a shower of
javelins, and the legio classica joined the seditious praetorians who
rejected with defiance the overtures of the tribunes sent by Galba. See
Тас. с. 31.
Germanicianorum: a correction by Turnebus of Germaniciorum; for
the form "Germanicianus" see on Vesp. 6, 2.
vexillatione: the vexillum, as distinct from the aquila and the
signum (c. 12, 2, n.), was a special ensign reserved for a corps of temporary
formation and for detachments; the name of such a detachment was
vexillatio (first found in Suetonius); vexillum denoted both the ensign
and the detachment, and vexillarius both the ensign-bearer and the soldier
who formed part of the detachment. Another meaning of vexillarius was
a time-expired soldier serving in the reserve company attached to each
legion, such a company having a special vexillum or ensign.
ob recens meritum
advolaverunt: Tacitus says that the detachments from the German army wavered for a long while between Otho and
Galba, being slow to desert Galba on account of his recent kindness:
Germanica vexilla diu nutavere, invalidis adhuc corporibus et placatis
animis, quod eos a Nerone Alexandriam praemissos atque inde rursus longa
navigatione aegros impensiore cura Galba refovebat. Mommsen (Prov.
Rom. Emp. ii 61) thinks that the sending of troops to Alexandria was in
connexion with an Ethiopian war which Nero had planned inter reliqua
bella (Plin. N.H. vi 29, 184), wishing to extend the imperial frontier in
Africa. These plans were upset by the revolt of Vindex, and any troops
which had been despatched were recalled.
magno opere: though the MSS. here and in Vesp. 21 give magnopere,
their evidence in other passages is decisively in favour of the uncontracted
forms magno (quanto, tanto) opere; see Ihm, p. liv.
fovisset: Wölfflin suggested refovisset (re- being lost after opere), as
Tacitus (l.c.) has refovebat.
§ 2. iugulatus est: “iugulum haurire" is the Virgilian mode of
expression which Tacitus (c. 41) uses of the murder: De percussore non
satis constat. Quidam Terentium evocatum (“one of the reserve" or
"one of the select bodyguard" of Galba, see c. 10, 3), alii Laecanium;
crebrior fama tradidit Camurium quintae decimae legionis militem impresso
gladio iugulum eius hausisse. Ceteri crura brachiaque (nam pectus tegebatur) foede laniavere; pleraque volnera feritate et saevitia trunco iam
corpori adiecta.
ad lacum Curti: Tac. (l.c.), iuxta Curti lacum trepidatione ferentium
Galba proiectus e sella ac provolutus est: Plut. Galb. 27, τὸν δὲ Γάλβαν .
περὶ τὸν Κουρτίου καλούμενον λάκκον ἐκκυλισθέντα. . ἔτυπτον ἐπιδραμόντες. The
“lacus Curtius" was originally a pool or swamp in the centre of the site
of the Roman Forum. It disappeared through being drained by the
cloacae of Tarquin. Varro (L.L. v 148-150) mentions three traditions of
the origin of the name: (1) the Sabine leader Mettius Curtius, hard
pressed by the soldiers of Romulus, galloped his horse safely across the
marsh (cf. Liv. i 12, Dion. Hal. ii 43); (2) in 362 B.C. a gulf opened in
the Forum and the haruspices declared that the gods demanded that one
of the courageous citizens whom Rome held dear should cast himself in
and it would be closed; Marcus Curtius fully armed mounted his horse
and plunged into the abyss (cf. Liv. vii 6); (3) the lacus was simply a
puteal erected by the consul C. Curtius (445 в.C.) round a spot in the
Forum struck by a thunder-bolt. Whatever the origin of the name, the
place was surrounded by some kind of an ornamental structure, and altars
were raised in the centre; cf. Ov. F. vi 397, Curtius ille lacus, siccas qui
sustinet aras, nunc solida est tellus, sed lacus ante fuit. Every year, on
the anniversary of the birth of Augustus, people of all classes came and
cast in a small votive coin for the safety of the emperor; cf. Suet. Aug.
57, 1, Omnes ordines in lacum Curtii quotannis ex voto pro salute eius
stipem iaciebant. As the lacus was connected with the underworld, these
coins were probably offerings to the gods below; see Wissowa, Religion
und Kultus der Römer² 235.
relictus ita uti erat: "quia, ut reperi in commentariis Graecorum,
adstiterit illi canis, quo vivo caput Galbae amputari non potuerit. Historia
id sit, an fabula, nihil pronuntio.” (Casaubon.) What commentarii
Graecorum" Casaubon is referring to I have not been able to ascertain.
•
gregarius miles caput amputavit: Plutarch (Galb. 27) mentions
those who were variously reported to have slain Galba, viz. Camurius (of
the 15th legion), Terentius, Laecanius, and Fabius Fabullus, the last named
being said to have also cut off his head and carried it away: οἱ δὲ (λέγουσι)
Φάβιον Φάβουλον, ὃν καί φασιν ἀποκόψαντα τὴν κεφαλὴν κομίζειν τῷ ἱματίῳ συλλαβόντα διὰ τὴν ψιλότητα (calvitiem) δυσπερίληπτον οὖσαν· ἔπειτα τῶν σὺν αὐτῷ κρύπτειν
οὐκ ἐώντων, ἀλλ᾿ ἐμφανῆ πᾶσιν ποιεῖν τὴν ἀνδραγαθίαν, περιπείραντα περὶ λόγχην καὶ
ἀναπήλαντα... δρόμῳ χωρεῖν, ὥσπερ αἱ βάκχαι, πολλάκις μεταστρεφόμενον καὶ
κραδαίνοντα τὴν λόγχην αἵματι καταρρεομένην. Tacitus (H. i 41, quoted above on
“iugulatus est'") mentions Terentius, Laecanius, and Camurius, but not
Fabius Fabullus. Groag (in Pauly-Wissowa vi 1769) infers (1) that
Plutarch does not reproduce his original quite accurately; (2) that Fabius
Fabullus was the gregarius miles who cut off Galba's head; (3) that he
was not one of those who actually slew Galba, and so is not included by
Tacitus among the reputed percussores.
inserto per os pollice: these unpleasant details are given even more
fully by Suetonius than by Plutarch (l.c.); Tacitus omits them; presumably they were given by the common authority (most probably Pliny the
Elder, see Introd. c. iii) followed by the three writers.
ad Othonem detulit: Otho, according to Plut. (l.c.), when Galba's
head was brought, said "This is nothing, my fellow-soldiers; show me the
head of Piso” (“ οὐδέν ἐστι τοῦτο, ὦ συστρατιῶται, τὴν Πείσωνός μοι κεφαλὴν
δείξατε"). The head of Piso, who had been adopted as son and successor
by Galba, was shortly afterwards brought to him. Otho's ghoulish joy at
seeing the head of Piso is described in Tac. H. i 44.
lixis calonibusque: Tac., c. 49, caput per lixas calonesque suffixum.
"lixae” are defined by Festus as "qui exercitum sequuntur quaestus
gratia"; they formed no part of the army (extra ordinem sunt militiae),
but supplied the soldiers with supplementary provisions, etc., and so
corresponded to sutlers or vivandiers.
"Calones" were servants of the
soldiers, discharging various menial duties; they were slaves, while lixae’”
were freeborn or, more rarely, freedmen.
..
hasta suffixum portarunt: Dio lxiv 6, καὶ τά τε ἄλλα τῷ σώματι αὐτοῦ
ἐλυμήναντο, καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποκόψαντες περὶ κοντὸν ἀνέπειραν: Tac. c. 44, praefixa
contis capita (of Galba and Piso) gestabantur inter signa cohortium iuxta
aquilam legionis, certatim ostentantibus cruentas manus qui occiderant,
qui interfuerant, qui vere, qui falso ut pulchrum et memorabile facinus
iactabant. Such outrageous treatment of fallen foes was common in
antiquity; cf. Justin xxiv 5 (describing the fate of Ptolemaeus Ceraunus,
king of Macedon, slain by the Gauls c. 280 в.с.), Ptolemaeus multis
vulneribus saucius capitur; caput eius amputatum, et lancea fixum, tota
acie ad terrorem hostium circumfertur.
Cupido: the variant cupide (GX) is much less forcible..
fruaris aetate tua: cf. Sen. Phaedr. 446, aetate fruere: mobili cursu
fugit; Liv. xxvi 50, 5, frui ludo aetatis; Cic. Verr. 2, 5, 33, multa eius
in stipendiis damna proferentur, quae ab isto aetatis fructu dissoluta et
compensata sunt. The use of aetas in the sense of adulescentia, iuventus,
ὥρα, is fairly frequent, e.g. Cic. Off. ii 13, 45, tua aetas incidit in id
bellum; Hor. Ep. i 20, 10, carus eris Romae donec te deserat aetas. So
too the diminutive aetatula, Suet. Claud. 16, 1, invenem corruptelis
adulteriisque famosum nihil amplius quam monuit ut aut parcius aetatulae
indulgeret aut certe cautius.
..
exierat in vulgus respondisse eum: for the subject-clause expressing
the report that had got out cf. Nep. Dat. 6, si in turbam exisset, ab
homine tam necessario se relictum. Suetonius has an object-clause with
“exiit opinio” in Ner. 53, exiit opinio descensurum eum ad Olympia inter
athletas.
ἔτι . . ἐστιν : words used by Diomedes (Il. v 254) and by Odysseus
(Od. xxi 426).
Patrobii Neroniani: Tac. H. i 49, caput ante Patrobii tumulum
(libertus is Neronis punitus a Galba fuerat) postera demum die repertum..
Tacitus (ii 95) couples him with Polyclitus as among the most hated of
Nero's freedmen: nondum quartus a victoria mensis, et libertus Vitelli
Asiaticus Polyclitos Patrobios et vetera odiorum nomina aequabat. Dio
(lxiv 3) describes how, when Galba became emperor, Patrobius was
punished along with Narcissus, Locusta, and others by being led in chains
through the city and then put to death. The cognomen ‘“Neronianus”
denotes a freedman of Nero.
aureis: the aureus (sc. denarius), as standardised by Augustus, was
equivalent to 25 silver denarii or 100 sestertii. It was a little heavier
than a sovereign and in relation to English gold would be worth about a
guinea. For the subsequent fluctuations in its weight (and value) see
Mattingly, Roman Coins 123 sqq.
redemptum: Plutarch (Galb. 28) says that the head of Galba was
given to the slaves of Patrobius; the head of Vinius was sold to his
daughter for 2500 drachmae (= 10,000 sestertii); that of Piso was given
to his wife Verania at her entreaty. Cf. Tac. i 47, Pisonem Verania uxor
ac frater Scribonianus, Titum Vinium Crispina filia composuere, quaesitis
redemptisque capitibus, quae venalia interfectores servaverant. Tacitus
says nothing of the sale of Galba's head.
eo loco: apparently near the building called "Sessorium"; cf. Plut.
1.c., λαβόντες δ' ἐκεῖνοι (i.e. the slaves of Patrobius) καὶ πάντα τρόπον αἰκισάμενοι καὶ καθυβρίσαντες ἔρριψαν ᾗ τοὺς ὑπὸ τῶν Καισάρων κολαζομένους θανατοῦσιν.
ὁ δὲ τόπος Σεσσώριον (so Bekker, Σηστέρτιον MSS.) καλεῖται. The meaning
and derivation of "Sessorium" are very obscure; see Jordan-Huelsen
Topogr. Rom i 3, 250, Hardy on Plut. l.c. A place of execution outside
the Esquiline gate is mentioned in Tac. A. ii 32, extra portam Esquilinam
more prisco advertere: Suet. Claud. 25, civitatem Romanam usurpantes
in campo Esquilino securi percussit: Comm. Cruq. on Hor. S. i 8, 11, in
Esquiliis publicis sepulti sunt extra portam in qua est Sessorium:
Epod. 5, 100, Esquilina porta Romae dicitur, ubi certus erat locus sepulcrorum ad corpora pauperum aut sceleratorum viliumque comburenda aut
canibus proicienda. Platner and Ashby (Topogr. Dict. Rome p. 488) point
out, with reference to these statements of Cruquius, that the "Sessorium"
was at least 1400 metres from the Esquiline gate.
..
on
ubi
animadversum
acting in accordance with the ancient belief that the vengeance which
brought most comfort to the slain was that his slayer should be slain
either at the same spot or at the tomb of his victim; cf. Soph. El. 1494:
Val. Max. ix 2, 2: Flor. iii 21, 26: Sen. Troad. 1152: Curt. vii 5, 43:
Justin xi 2, 1.
fuerat: the freedman of Patrobius was
dispensator: cf. c. 12, 3; Vesp. c. 22, n.
Argivus: Tac. H. i 49, Caibae corpus diu neglectum, et licentia tencbrarum plurimis ludibriis vexatum, dispensator Argius (= ᾿Αργεῖος, Plut.),
e prioribus servis, humili sepultura in privatis eius hortis contexit; caput
postera demum die repertum et cremato iam corpori admixtum est.
Plutarch (c. 28) says that Argeius was a freedman of Galba's; that he
buried the body by night; and that the body, in the first instance, was
lifted up and carried away by Helvidius Priscus, with Otho's permission.
For Helvidius Priscus see on Dom. 10, 3.
ceterum truncum: the use of the sing. ceterus, which is rare in class.
Lat. (5 exx. in Cic.), occurs 8 times in Suetonius.
•
in hortis sepulturae dedit: cf. Eutrop. vii 16, iugulatus (Galba) in
foro Romae sepultusque in hortis suis, qui sunt Aurelia via non longe ab
urbe Roma.
Aurelia via: this road, dating at least from the second cent. B.C.,
led northwards from Rome; it touched the sea at Alsium in Etruria, and
then ran along the coast of Etruria up to Pisa; the name was extended
to the continuation of this road from Pisa to Arelate (Arles) in Gaul.
CHAPTER 21.
statura fuit iusta: 'iusta statura aestimatione Romana senûm pedum
circiter fuit" (Casaubon). The Roman pes = 11.65 inches. In Liv. vii 10
we find the expression "media militaris statura," which is to be explained
in the light of Veget. Mil. i 5, proceritatem tironum scio semper exactam
ita ut senos pedes, vel certe quinos et denas uncias habentes inter alares
equites, vel in primis legionum cohortibus probarentur. The "statura”
of the other Caesars is thus described by Suetonius: -Julius, “excelsa'';
Augustus, "brevis”; Tiberius, "quae iustam excederet"; Caligula,
“eminens”; Nero, “prope iusta"; Otho, "modica"; Vespasian, "quadrata"; Titus, "non procera"; Domitian, “procera." The abl. of quality
is usual in these descriptions, but the gen. is found in Oth. 12, 1.
praecalvo: cf. c. 20, 2; Plut. Galb. 13, ἐπισκώπτων τὴν φαλακρότητα
("baldness") καὶ ῥυσότητα (“wrinkledness'") τοῦ Γάλβα.
The compound
praecalvus (found only here) most probably means "very bald” (valde
calvus), though some explain it as 'bald in front.” Other compounds with
intensive prae- used by Suetonius are praeclarus, praecupidus, praedives,
praedurus, praeferox, praegrandis, praelautus, praepinguis, praetrepidus,
praevalidus. He also has praeacutus sharp-pointed,” praemortuus “prematurely dead." The epithet praecanus which Horace applies to himself
(Ep. i 20, 24) may mean "very grey," "grey before his time," or "grey
in front" (see Wilkins ad loc.).
oculis caeruleis: similar descriptions are given in Iul. 45, nigris
vegetisque oculis fuit; Aug. 79, oculos habuit claros ac nitidos, quibus
etiam existimari volebat inesse quiddam divini vigoris; Tib. 68, cum praegrandibus oculis et qui, quod mirum esset, noctu etiam et in tenebris
viderent, sed ad breve et cum primum e somno patuissent: deinde rursus
hebescebant; Calig. 50, oculis et temporibus (“temples") concavis fuit;
Ner. 51, oculis caesiis ("bluish-grey'") et hebetioribus fuit; Dom. 18,
grandibus oculis, verum acie hebetiore fuit.
adunco naso: to judge from his coins and busts (e.g. that in the
Capitoline Museum) Galba had a very pronounced aquiline or hooked nose,
and that presumably is the meaning here, though aduncus nasus is always
explained as a "turned-up nose" in Hor. S. i 6, 5, naso suspendis adunco
(cf. Pers. i 40, nimis uncis Naribus indulges), and in Ter. Heaut. 1062,
virginem sparso ore, adunco naso. Suetonius describes the aquiline
nose of Augustus, Aug. 79, habuit nasum et a summo eminentiorem et ab
imo deductiorem (“bent inwards" i.e. a “Roman" nose).
articulari morbo: arthritis, inflammation of the joints due to gout
in the hands or feet (cheragra, podagra); cf. Scrib. Larg. 101, ad articularem morbum quem ἀρθρίτιν vocant: Hor. S. ii 7, 15, iusta cheragra Contudit articulos: Pers. v 58, cum lapidosa cheragra Fregerit articulos:
Plin. N.H. xx 195, anesum
lenit articulares morbos (in Ser. Samm.
695 sqq. a number of cures for articularis morbus are given). The emperor
Septimius Severus was crippled by this disease: Spart. Sept. Sev. 16, 6,
quod consistere in curru adfectus articulari morbo non posset.
distortissimis: cf. Apul. Met. v 10, ego vero maritum articulari morbo
complicatum curvatumque
sustineo, plerumque detortos et duratos in
lapidem digitos eius perfricans.
evolvere:
ἀναπτύσσειν, ἀνελίττειν, to unroll, to open for reading;
cf. Aug. 89, 2, in evolvendis (= legendis) utriusque linguae auctoribus:
Cic. Tusc. i 12, 24, evolvo diligenter eius eum librum, qui est de animo:
Hor. S. i 3, 112, fastos evolvere mundi.
=
valeret: valere c. inf. is a poetical construction; Livy is the first prose
writer to use it, and he has it only once (xxxviii 23, 4); Krebs-Schmalz,
Antibarb. ii 647.
dexteriore: for the comparative see on ‘‘sinisteriore,” Dom. 17, 1.
caro: there is a variant gibbus, for which see on Dom. 23, 2.
fascia: cf. Dom. 17, 1; Ov. A.A. iii 274, inflatum circa fascia pectus
eat; Capit. Anton. Pius c. 13, tiliaceis tabulis in pectore positis fasciabatur, ut rectus incederet.
CHAPTER 22.
..
cibi plurimi: cf. Aug. 76, 1, cibi minimi erat: Cic. Fam. ix 26, 4,
non multi cibi hospitem accipies, multi ioci: Hor. C. i 36, 13, multi
Damalis meri: iii 9, 7, multi Lydia nominis: Cic. Rosc. Am. 6, plurimarum
palmarum gladiator: Cic. Att. xiii 28, Cornificia multarum nuptiarum.
The descriptive genitive was preferred by Latin writers to express Greek
compounds like πολυφάγος, πολυπότης, πολυώνυμος, πολυστεφής, πολύγαμος;
in popular Latin we find compounds, e.g. multibibus (Plaut.), multiscius
(Apul.).
traditur: sc. fuisse; cf. Caes. B.G. v 6, quod eum magni animi, magnae
inter Gallos auctoritatis cognoverat.
inter cenam vero: vero is used intensively, with a special emphasis
on the preceding word.
abundantis: sc. cibi. This is Graevius' correction for abundanti or
abundans. In the Milan ed. of 1475 the reading is abundantem; Gruter
suggested abundanter; Guyetus abutens (with subter for super).
=
congestas super manus reliquias, etc.: a most obscure passage, which
may mean that Galba ordered the leavings of the huge portions served to
him to be carried round in handfuls and distributed (spargi dividi)
among the servi a pedibus. It was customary to give the attendants
what was left when dinner was over; cf. Sen. Ep. 77, 8, Marcellinum
admonuit non esse inhumanum, quemadmodum cena peracta reliquiae
circumstantibus dividuntur, sic peracta vita aliquid porrigi his qui totius
vitae ministri fuissent: Plut. Quaest. Rom. 64. Hofstee and Rolfe follow
Baumg.-Cr. in explaining super manus as = ante se (in mensa). Baumg..
Cr. is peculiar in taking stantibus as dat. of the agent, his interpretation
being as follows:-‘“Inter cenam usque eo abundantis cibi fuit, ut congestas super manus, h.e. ante se, ante locum ubi sumserat cibum, reliquias
circumferri iuberet, scil. circum mensam et convivas, ostentandi causa,
quantum fauces et venter valerent, spargique (quod dicitur de rebus
solidis, ut fundi de fluidis), sive in unum locum colligi, ad admirationem
convivarum, et ut ipse acto labore delectaretur, ad pedes stantibus, h.e.
a servis, ad lectum sive pedes ministrantibus, dativo, ut saepius, posito pro
ablativo cum praepositione “a”, adeoque hoc loco, ne auris offenderetur
excipientibus se verbis ab ad pedes stantibus.” D. C. Grimm (Dissert.
on Galb. c. 22, Leipzig 1798) took super manus as = per manus and altered
circumferri to circum se ferri, thinking that Galba was so gluttonous that
he had the remains left by each diner passed along from hand to hand
and set before him, and then having satisfied his appetite he gave anything that was over to the attendants. Stahr also takes super manus as
=
per manus, but interprets the passage differently:- "Bei Tafel nun
gar häufte er eine solche Masse Speisen vor sich auf, dass er die Reste
derselben von Hand zu Hand umherreichen und (zuletzt) unter die aufwartende Dienerschaft verteilen liess." The difficulty in extracting any
satisfactory meaning makes it highly probable that the text is unsound.
ad pedes stantibus: slaves who stood behind the diners as they
reclined on couches at table; cf. Sen. Ben. iii 27, servus qui cenanti ad
pedes steterat: Petron. Satyr. 58, Giton, qui ad pedes stabat.
Caligula
loved to humiliate senators by making them act in this capacity: Calig.
26, 2, quosdam summis honoribus functos . sibi cenanti modo ad pluteum
modo ad pedes stare succinctos linteo passus est. For these servi a pedibus
see Marquardt, Privatl.2 148, 322. Such slaves might be provided by the
host (Daremberg-Saglio, iv 1276 n.), but at ordinary private dinner-parties they usually came with their masters, took charge of their shoes
(soleae), stood behind them during dinner, and carried home any presents
(apophoreta) made by the host to their masters.
..
libidinis pronior: a very rare constr.; cf. Luc. i 461, ruendi mens
prona viris: Claud. Ruf. ii 400, pronior audendi. Suetonius also uses
pronus with the dat., with ad, and with in. R. Stephanus conjectured
libidinis pronioris; Torrentius libidini . pronior; Boxhorn libidinibus
pronior. In the Augustan poets and in later prose (isolated instances
in old Lat. but not in class. Lat.) the genitive is used with a great number
of adjectives of the most varied signification in order to define the sphere
or respect in which the adj. is applicable; see the list in Kühner-Stegmann,
i 443 sq. Suetonius has the gen. with certus, parcus, tenax, etc.; see
Appendix I. § 3. B. g.
in mares: contrast Claud. 33, 2, libidinis in feminas profusissimae,
marum omnino expers.
praeduros: "well hardened", poetical and in late prose; cf. Verg.
Aen. x 748, homo praedurus viribus: id. G. ii 531, corporaque agresti
nudant praedura palaestrae: Columell. vi 2, 1, praedura aetas (opp. to
tenera aetas). See on praecalvus, c. 21.
exoletus: Festus defines exoletus as "qui adolescere, id est crescere,
desiit.'' The word was used in the special sense of “adolescens alienae
libidini inserviens”; cf. Tit. 7, 1: Calig. 24, 3: Tib. 43, 1: Iul. 49, 2:
76, 3: Tac. A. xv 37: Cic. Mil. 21, ille qui semper secum scorta, semper
exoletos, semper lupas duceret. Suetonius also uses exoletus simply in the
sense of obsoletus; see Galb. 4, 4 (n.): Aug. 86, 2: Claud. 22.
Icelum: see on c. 14, 2.
concubinis: for concubinus (= delicatus, a favourite slave) see R. Ellis
on Catull. lxi 121-123, Nec nuces pueris neget Desertum domini audiens
Concubinus amorem.
nuntiantem: Plutarch (Galb. 7) describes the arrival of Icelus in Spain
bearing to Galba the news of Nero's death: Ἦν δὲ θέρος ἤδη, καὶ βραχὺ πρὸ
δείλης ἧκεν ἀπὸ ῾Ρώμης Ικελος ἀνὴρ ἀπελεύθερος ἑβδομαῖος (i.e. in 6 days). Πυθόμενος
δὲ τὸν Γάλβαν ἀναπαύεσθαι καθ' ἑαυτὸν ἐβάδιζε συντόνως ἐπὶ τὸ δωμάτιον αὐτοῦ, καὶ
βίᾳ τῶν θαλαμηπόλων (cubiculariorum) ἀνοίξας καὶ παρελθὼν ἀπήγγειλεν, κ.τ.λ.
artissimis osculis: cf. Apul. Met. ii 13, eum amplexus exosculatur
..
artissime.
..
non modo sed: this use of sed for sed etiam occurs also in Tit. 7, 2,
Aug. 88, Claud. 16, 2; the second clause in every case being stronger than
the first. In Cicero when non modo is followed by sed, the second clause
may be either stronger or weaker. See Kühner-Stegmann, ii '60.
velleretur: cf. Iul. 45, circa corporis curam morosior, ut non solum
tonderetur diligenter ac raderetur, sed velleretur etiam, ut quidam exprobraverunt: Quintil. ii 5, 12, vulsi levatique et inustas comas acu comentes.
Mayor (on Juv. viii 16 and 114, xi 157) has collected a number of passages
on this practice and the contempt in which in it was held by Romans of
the old type.
CHAPTER 23.
...
tertio et septuagesimo aetatis anno: cf. [Aurel. Vict.] Epit. 6, cum
septuagesimum tertium aetatis annum ageret
caesus est: Tac. H. i 49,
hunc exitum habuit Servius Galba, tribus et septuaginta annis quinque
principes (i.e. Aug., Tib., Calig., Claud., Ner.) prospera fortuna emensus
et alieno imperio felicior quam suo: Dio (Xiphilinus) Ixiv 6, ἔζησε δὲ
Γάλβας ἔτη δύο καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα (Zonaras adds καὶ ἡμέρας τρεῖς καὶ εἴκοσιν).
Thus, according to Dio (Zonaras), Galba must have been born on Dec. 24,
5 B.C., for he died on Jan. 15, 69 A.D. It is impossible to reconcile
Suetonius' statement here that Galba was in his 73rd year at the time of
his death with the statement in c. 4 supr. that he was born on Dec. 24,
3 B.C., in which case he would only have been in his 71st year when he
died. We must assume therefore that Suetonius has made a slip with
regard to the year of Galba's birth which was 5 B.C. and not 3 B.C.
further complication, however, arises from the fact that both Plutarch
(Galb. 8) and Eutropius (vii 16) say that Galba was in his 73rd year
when he became emperor in June 68 A.D. (and so must have been born
in 6 B.C.); their statement is supported by what Suetonius tells us in
Ner. 40 about the warning of the Delphic oracle to Nero to beware of the
73rd year; Nero understood this to mean that he would live to be 73,
and never took into account Galba's age. For other chronological inconsistencies in Suetonius see on Oth. 11, 2; Vitell. 18; Tit. 11.
A
imperii mense septimo: he reigned from June 9, '68 A.D. (the date
of Nero's death) to Jan. 15, 69; cf. Eutrop. vii 16, insidiis Othonis occisus
est imperii mense septimo: [Aurel. Vict.] Epit. 6, imperavit menses septem
diesque totidem: Joseph. Bell. Iud. iv 9, 2, φθάνει Γάλβας ἀναιρεθεὶς μετὰ
μῆνας ἑπτὰ καὶ ἴσας ἡμέρας: Tac. H. i 37 (Otho addressing the soldiers just
before the murder of Galba), septem a Neronis fine menses sunt, etc. Dio
(Xiph. Zon.), lxiv 6, says he reigned nine months and thirteen days (ἦρξε
μῆνας ἐννέα καὶ ἡμέρας δεκατρεῖς), counting from the 2nd of April, 68 A.D.,
when he was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers in Spain (cf. c. 10, 1).
ut primum licitum est: this may have been, as Hofstee suggests,
after the defeat of Otho by the Flavianists. When Antonius Primus,
Vespasian's general, advanced from Pannonia into upper Italy, he ordered
the images of Galba to be set up again in all the towns; Tac. H. iii 7,
Desiderata. diu res interpretatione gloriaque in maius accipitur, postquam
Galbae imagines discordia temporum subversas in omnibus municipiis recoli
iussit Antonius, decorum pro causa (Flaviana) ratus, si placere Galbae
principatus et partes revirescere crederentur. The decree which Suetonius
mentions may have been passed between the occupation of Rome by the
Flavian forces (about Dec. 20, 69 A.D.) and the arrival of Vespasian in
person at Rome in the summer of 70.
senatus
statuam.. decreverat: in 158 B.C. the censors ordered the
removal of all statues from the Forum and Capitol unless they had been
decreed by the people or by the senate. The right of granting them came
to be confined to the senate, but the restriction was often evaded, and
Claudius had to issue an edict that no statue was to be erected at Rome
without the order of the senate unless by an individual who had built
or restored some public building (Dio lx 25). We read of the emperor's
sanction being obtained for the erection of a statue, e.g. Plin. Ep. i 17,
Titinius Capito ab imperatore nostro (i.e. Trajan) impetravit ut sibi liceret
statuam L. Silani in foro ponere; but the emperors did not directly
authorize the erection, they asked the senate to decree the honour; cf.
Capitol. Marc. c. 2, cui (Frontoni) et statuam in senatu petiit: c. 3, cui
(Iunio Rustico) post obitum a senatu statuas postulavit. See Mommsen,
Staatsr. iii 1184 sqq. The most famous of the monuments decreed by
the senate to Roman emperors was the Column of Trajan.
rostratae columnae superstantem: columns adorned with the beaks
(rostra) of ships were erected at Rome originally to celebrate naval
victories, the best known being that in honour of C. Duilius for his defeat
of the Carthaginians in 260 в.с. A columna rostrata formed the support
of a triumphal statue decreed by the senate to Octavius in celebration of
his naval victory over Sextus Pompeius at Naulochus in 36 в.с.; cf.
Appian Bell. Civ. v 130, καὶ ἐπινίκιος ἐν ἀγορᾷ (Foro) χρύσεος ἑστάναι μετὰ
σχήματος οὗπερ ἔχων ἐσῆλθε, περικειμένων τῷ κίονι νεῶν ἐμβολῶν (rostrorum):
Servius on Verg. G. iii 29, navali surgentes aere columnas. Statues on a
columna rostrata are depicted not only on coins of Augustus but also on
those of Vespasian and his sons Titus and Domitian (Eckhel vii p. 85;
Cohen i pp. 82, 396).
in parte Fori qua trucidatus est: i.e. beside the lacus Curtius, see
c. 20. The people paid honours to the same spot in their exultation at
Otho's death; cf. Tac. H. ii 55, populus cum laura ac floribus Galbae
imagines circum templa tulit, congestis in modum tumuli coronis, iuxta
lacum Curtii, quem locum Galba moriens sanguine infecerat.
decretum abolevit: cf. Claud. 6, 2, quod decretum abolitum est:
Tac. A. iii 28, quae triumviratu iusserat abolevit (Augustus): Spart. Sev.
17, 5, Salvii Iuliani decreta iussit aboleri. The verb used of the senate
cancelling a decree already passed is inducere (διαγράφειν); e.g. Suet. Iul.
16, inducto priore decreto: Cic. de domo 4, 10, coeptum est referri de
inducendo senatus consulto. When the senate of itself or at the direction
of the emperor wished to cancel a decree already completed and registered
(ad aerarium delatum), some one moved a resolution “ut senatusconsultum
antea factum induceretur, tabulaque in qua perscriptum erat deleretur.”
See Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 1014.
percussores summisisse: if the allegation is true (no other author
mentions it), Galba was trying to remove a dangerous rival who was in
command of a large army in Judaea (see Vesp. 4, 5), and he was using
the same means as Nero had adopted to try to remove Galba himself
when governor of Hispania Tarraconensis (see Galb. 9, 2). For summittere
cf. Tit. 6, 1.
CHAPTER 1.
orti sunt oppido Ferentio: in class. Lat. when urbs or oppidum precedes the name of the place a prep. is used in preference to the simple
local ablative (Kühner-Stegmann, i 480). Suetonius uses ortus (a) with
ex, e.g. Tib. 1, 1, gens Claudia orta est ex Regillis oppido Sabinorum;
(b) with a, e.g. Iul. 6, 1, maternum genus a regibus ortum; (c) with
simple abl., e.g. Ner. 28, 1, regio genere ortam: Aug. 2, 3, equestri familia
ortum se.
Ferentio: cf. Tac. H. ii 50, origo illi e municipio Ferentio. Ferentium,
or Ferentinum, was an Etruscan city on the site of the modern ruins of
Ferento. It is mentioned again in Vesp. 3, and is to be distinguished
from Ferentinum in the territory of the Hernici in Latium. It was
probably a dependency of Volsinii in Etruscan times (Dennis, Cities and
Cemeteries of Etruria, i³ 156 sqq.). We first hear of it in the time of
Augustus as a Roman colony of small importance (Strab. v 226; Frontin.
de colon.); Vitruvius (ii 7), like Tacitus, calls it a municipium.
possessed a temple of Fortuna (Tac. A. xv 53), probably the Etruscan
goddess Nurtia. There are the remains of a magnificent theatre at Ferento.
The connexion of the family of Otho with Ferentium is confirmed by an
inscription found there: M. Sal[vio Othoni Aug.] tribu[nic(ia) potest(ate)]
municipe[s
...
See Pauly-Wissowa, i A. 2035.
It
ex principibus Etruriae: cf. Hor. C. iii 29, 1, where Maecenas is
addressed as “Tyrrhena regum progenies," his ancestors on his father's
side, the Cilnii, being Lucumones or chieftains at Arretium. Etruria in
ancient times was a confederation of twelve states or cities, each with
an aristocratic form of government, the chief rulers, who combined political
and ecclesiastical functions, being called Lucumones; see Dennis, op. cit. i³
Introd. p. li.
Salvius: restored by Stephanus for “Silvius." Salvius, which is
often found as a praenomen in the contracted form Sa. or Sal., did not
become widespread as a gentile name till a late period. Those who bore
it as a single name in Republican times were persons of no great distinction,
often slaves e.g. the leader of the Sicilian slave war in 104: the influential
freedman of Caesar often mentioned in Cicero's Letters: the literary slave
or freedman of Atticus. The Salvius who as trib. pleb. in 43 B.C. vetoed
the decree of the senate declaring Antony a public enemy and who later
sided with Cicero against Antony and perished in the proscription may
have been a kinsman of the M. Salvius Otho whom Suetonius mentions
here; see Münzer in Pauly-Wissowa, i A. 2023.
incertum an ingenua: Suetonius is fond of introducing disjunctive
questions depending on incertum or dubium, or with incertum and dubium
omitted; e.g. Iul. 18, 1, profectus est incertum metune iudicii an quo
maturius sociis subveniret: Iul. 58, 1, dubium cautior an audentior:
Galb. 12, 3, illa quoque verene an falso per ludibrium iactabantur:
Vesp. 1, 2, Flavius Petro bello civili Pompeianarum partium centurio
an evocatus profugit. In our passage the first part of the interrogation
is omitted.
..
Liviae Augustae: wife of Augustus; see on Galb. 1 and 5, 2. Galba
was said to have owed his consulship to her (Galb. 2, 1, n.).
in cuius domo creverat: similarly Titus was brought up along with
Britannicus son of the emperor Claudius (Tit. 2, n.).
senator est factus: by imperial favour a person of equestrian rank
could become a senator in two ways: (1) the emperor could exercise his
right of adlectio and admit him directly to the senate, assigning him a
definite place on the roll, usually inter tribunicios, occasionally inter praetorios, and in the 3rd cent. even inter consulares, entitling him to the
privileges of those who had actually filled these offices; (2) the emperor
could bestow on him the latus clavus qualifying him to start with the
vigintivirate (see on Galb. 6, 1) and then proceed to the quaestorship and
the successive magistracies in the cursus honorum; sometimes the latus
clavus cum quaestura was granted and then the imperial favourite could
begin his career with the quaestorship, an office carrying with it admission
to the senate. Cf. Mommsen, Staatsr. ii 938 sqq.
nec praeturae gradum excessit: this fact is mentioned by Tacitus
also, who says that the emperor Otho had an “avus praetorius” (H. ii 50).
By a curious coincidence the grandfather of Galba never went beyond
being praetor; cf. Galb. 3, 3, avus non egressus praeturae gradum.
On coins with the head of Augustus (Eckhel, v 289) this M. Salvius Otho
is named as IIIvir A.A.A.F.F. (i.e. triumvir auro argento aere flando
feriundo, one of the triumviri monetales, directors of the mint). For nec
(= neque vero, neque tamen) cf. Oth. 5, 2 sollicitati reliqui, nec adeo
multi; Dom. 7, 2, edixit, nec exsequi rem perseveravit.
§2. pater: Tac. H. ii 50, (Othoni) pater consularis; he was consul
suffectus in 33 A.D., Galba being consul ordinarius during the first six
months of that year (Galb. 6, 1). In the acta Arvalia (Henzen p. xlviii)
this Lucius Otho is mentioned as "flamen et pro magistro" of the Fratres
Arvales in 39 A.D. (Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 166).
materno genere praeclaro: Hofstee conjectures that the mother belonged to the gens Titia and that her grandson Titianus (see below) derived
his name from his grandmother, after the fashion of the period.
propinquitatium: “connexions"; cf. Nep. Dion 1, 2, Dion autem,
praeter nobilem propinquitatem, generosamque maiorum famam, multa
alia ab natura habuit bona; for the pl. cf. Cic. Fin. v 23, si propinquitates summo bono non continentur. Suetonius uses the word only
here and in Ner. 35, 4; elsewhere necessitudo and necessitudines, the latter
frequently in a concrete sense (= necessarii, ἀναγκαῖοι).
non absimilis : absimilis (ἀνόμοιος, late Gr. ἀφόμοιος) is found once in
class. Lat., Caes. B.G. iii 14, falces .. non absimili forma muralium falcium
(sc. formae); it is always used with a negative (by litotes) and it takes
the dative, as in Dom. 10, 1, arte formaque non absimilis magistro.
..
ut plerique crederent: there was a similar scandal current about
Drusus (father of the emperor Claudius), who was borne by Livia three
months after her marriage to Augustus, and it was said that Augustus
had begotten him in adulterous intercourse with her while she was the
wife of Tib. Claudius Nero (Claud. 1, fuit suspicio ex vitrico per adulterii
consuetudinem procreatum). Suetonius uses plerique not merely in the
sense of plurimi but also in that of multi or permulti (e.g. Galb. 16, 1;
Dom. 6, 2:8, 2:10,5:19; so in Nep., Liv., Tac.); sometimes, as here,
it is impossible to determine in which sense he is using it. The same
difficulty presents itself in Tacitus; see Gerber and Greef, Lex. Tac.
urbanos honores: i.e. the offices included in the regular cursus honorum,
the quaestorship, aedileship or tribuneship, praetorship, and consulship.
proconsulatum Africae: held also by Galba (Galb. 7, 1), Vitellius
(Vitell. 5), and Vespasian (Vesp. 4, 3). The provinces of Africa and
Asia were reserved for consulares (see on “proconsulatum,” Galb. 3, 4).
Lucius Otho probably succeeded Galba as proconsul and, like Galba, may
have been invested with special military powers (see on Galb. 7, 1).
extraordinaria imperia: we have no information as to the precise
nature of these, or the province or provinces in which Lucius Otho held
them. For an example of a provincial governor who was given an
‘“ extraordinarium imperium” see on Vitell. 2, 4, Lucius Syriae praepositus.
Illyrico: in the division of provinces in 27 B.c. Illyricum was made
a senatorial province, but in consequence of continual rebellions and the
necessity of keeping a military force there it was transferred to the
emperor (c. 10 B.c.) and divided into two provinces, Pannonia and Dalmatia.
In a wider sense Illyricum included Noricum and Moesia.
motu Camilli: the name of this Camillus is variously recorded as
Furius Camillus Scribonianus, L. Arruntius Camillus Scribonianus,
Camillus Arruntius, Camillus Scribonianus, etc. Mommsen (Hermes iii
133 sqq.) shows that he was a son of M. Furius Camillus (cons. '8 A.D.);
and was adopted by L. Arruntius (cons. 6 A.D.); his mother was the daughter
of Scribonia and Sextus Pompeius, hence he was called Scribonianus. He
was consul in 32 A.D. (see Oth. 2, 1), and was appointed governor (legatus
Aug. pro. pr. consularis) of Dalmatia under Caligula. He was continued
in this office under Claudius, but in 42 A.D. revolted against the emperor and
announced that he would restore the republic. Many senators and knights
flocked to him, but his soldiers refused to follow him and he was forced to
flee to the island of Issa in the Adriatic where he killed himself according
to Dio (lx 15, ἑκούσιος ἀπέθανε), but Tacitus (H. ii 75) says he was slain by a
private soldier. See also Tac. H. i 89, A. xii 52; Plin. Ep. iii 16;
Oros. vii 6.
ex paenitentia: cf. Claud. 13, 2, bellum civile movit Furius Camillus
Scribonianus Dalmatiae legatus, verum intra quintum diem oppressus est,
legionibus quae sacramentum mutaverant in paenitentiam religione
('superstition'") conversis, postquam, denuntiato ad novum imperatorem
itinere, casu quodam ac divinitus neque aquila ornari neque signa convelli
moverique potuerunt.
quasi: causal, see on Tit. 5, 1.
defectionis adversus: no example of this construction (for the usual
defectio ab) is given in the Thesaur. Ling. Lat.
ante principia: the use of the prep. ante shows that principia (= ἀρχεῖα,
cf. Plut. Galb. 12, ἐν τοῖς ἀρχείοις, ἃ πριγκίπια καλοῦσι ῾Ρωμαῖοι) is here
used for the officers' quarters themselves; it was also used in a wider
sense for the large open space in the centre of the camp containing the
general's tent (praetorium) and those of the higher officers, the eagle and
standards of the legion, and the raised platform (tribunal) where the
general administered justice and addressed the troops. The exact meaning
of principia and the precise relation between principia and praetorium
have been much disputed, some identifying principia with the via principalis or main street (E. and W.) of the camp or at least with that part
of it which the officers' tents or quarters adjoined. See Daremberg-Saglio,
i 945, iv '640; Smith, Dict. Ant. i3 374. The principia and praetorium are
often mentioned in connexion with military punishments of a merely
degrading kind (see on Vitell. 8, 1), but executions usually took place outside the porta decumana of the camp and were supervised by the tribunes
or centurions, so the procedure of Lucius Otho was quite exceptional.
promotos in ampliorem gradum: cf. Tac. H. ii 75, sic Scribonianum
sub Claudio interfectum, sic percussorem eius Volaginium e gregario ad
summa militiae provectum. The use of promovere aliquem in the sense
of perducere, producere, provehere is post-Aug.
§3. detecta equitis R. fraude: this was presumably one (though we
know not which) of the conspiracies by equites against Claudius which
are mentioned by Suetonius, Tacitus, and Dio; cf. Suet. Claud. 13, reperti
et equestris ordinis duo in publico cum dolone (“sword-cane'') ac venatorio
cultro praestolantes, alter ut egressum theatro, alter ut sacrificantem apud
Martis aedem adoreretur: Tac. A. xi 22 (47 A.D.), interea Romae, nullis
palam neque cognitis mox causis, Cn. Nonius eques Romanus ferro accinctus
reperitur in coetu salutantium principem; nam postquam tormentis
dilaniabatur, de se non infitiatus conscios non edidit, incertum an occultans :
Dio lx 18 (43 A.D.), καί τις ἐν τούτῳ τῶν ἱππέων, ὡς καὶ ἐπιβουλεύσας τῷ Κλαυδίῳ,
κατὰ τοῦ Καπιτωλίου ὑπό τε τῶν δημάρχων (‘tribunes '') καὶ τῶν ὑπάτων
(“consuls") κατεκρημνίσθη. Hofstee is probably right in assuming that
Suetonius in the present passage is referring to the design against the
life of Claudius which is mentioned by Tacitus as frustrated in 47 A.D.,
as L. Otho was ‘“inter patricios adlectus” when Claudius was censor in 48,
and thus Otho's reward would come shortly after his service to the emperor.
Dessau (Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 168) thinks that the reference is to the
attempt in 43 which is mentioned by Dio.
statua in Palatio posita: cf. Tit. 2. Nero conferred a like honour
on Tigellinus and Nerva; Tac. A. xv 72, tum, quasi gesta bello expositurus,
vocat senatum et triumphale decus Petronio Turpiliano consulari, Cocceio
Nervae praetori designato, Tigellino praefecto praetorii tribuit, Tigellinum
et Nervam ita extollens ut super triumphales in foro imagines apud
Palatium quoque effigies eorum sisteret. In our passage and in Tac. l.c.
Friedlaender (Sitteng. iii¹º 75) takes Palatium as the Palatine hill, not
the imperial Palace; so too Hofstee, on the ground that in both cases the
senate decrees the honour, and the senate had nothing to do with the
Palace. But the erection of statues required the authorisation of the
senate (Galb. 23 n.), and the emperors went through the formality of
asking the senate to decree the statues.
adlectum inter patricios: the creation of a large number of patricians
by Claudius as censor in 48 A.D. is mentioned in Tac. A. xi 25, Isdem diebus,
in numerum patriciorum adscivit Caesar vetustissimum quemque e senatu
aut quibus clari parentes fuerant, paucis iam reliquis familiarum, quas
Romulus maiorum et L. Brutus minorum gentium appellaverant, exhaustis
etiam quas dictator Caesar lege Cassia et princeps Augustus lege Saenia
sublegere; laetaque haec in rem publicam munia multo gaudio censoris
inibantur. Under the Republic new patrician gentes were coopted by the
patrician curiae in the comitia curiata; the dictator Caesar and Augustus
created them under special law; Claudius created them in virtue of his
powers as censor, so too Vespasian and Titus (see note on Vesp. 9, 2);
when the censorship fell into abeyance, the emperors, beginning with
Trajan, created them in virtue of their general powers. See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 1100 sq., iii 29 sq.
Vir, quo meliores, etc.: a similar eulogy was bestowed by Augustus
on Drusus (father of the emperor Claudius) after his death: Claud. 1, 5,
defunctum ita laudaverit, ut deos precatus sit, similes ei Caesares (i.e.
Gaius and Lucius) suos facerent.
ne opto quidem: Reid, on Cic. Balb. 9, points out the difference between
“sperare” to look forward to what is practicable and “optare” to look
forward to what can happen only by an extraordinary stroke of good
fortune; optare is used of the wild dreams of philosophers, e.g. Cic. Acad.
ii 121, somnia censet haec esse Democriti non docentis sed optantis.
Albia Terentia: Tacitus does not mention her name, but he says of
Otho, "pater consularis, avus praetorius; maternum genus inpar nec tamen
indecorum” (H. ii 50). Eutropius (vii 17) says that the family of Otho's
mother was more noble than that of his father: Otho materno genere
nobilior quam paterno, neutro tamen obscuro (some would transpose
paterno and materno, to make Eutropius accord with Tacitus). The notice
of Otho in Suidas begins: ὁ μετὰ Γάλβαν βασιλεύσας, γένους ἀσήμου καὶ
ἀφανοῦς ὤν (Barth proposed γένους μὴ ἀσήμου : cf. Plut. Galb. 19,
Μάρκος Ὄθων, ἀνὴρ γένει μὲν οὐκ ἀφανής).
splendida femina: it is generally assumed that she was of an
equestrian family, the epithet splendidus being applied to an eques of
high position and great wealth who had held no magisterial office at Rome
(Mommsen, Staatsr. iii 565); but more probably the adj. here means
simply "of distinguished family," the precise rank of the family being
unspecified; cf. Tit. 4, 2, duxit uxorem Marciam Furnillam splendidi
generis: Tac. Agr. 6, Domitiam Decidianam, splendidis natalibus ortam,
sibi iunxit.
filios tulit: for this expression see on Vesp. 3.
L. Titianum: his full name was Lucius Salvius Otho Titianus.
Tacitus (A. xii 52), mentioning him as consul under Claudius in 52 A.D.,
calls him Salvius Otho, but in H. i 90 ii 60, Agr. 6 gives his name as
Salvius Titianus. He is mentioned very often in the records of the Fratres
Arvales from 57 to 69 A.D. (C.I.L. vi 2038-2051). He was proconsul of
Asia ("in omnem aviditatem pronus," Tac. Agr. 6) with Agricola as his
quaestor in 63-64, and became consul for a second time in 69 along with
his brother the emperor. When Otho set out to meet Vitellius he left
Titianus in charge of the city, but soon sent for him to take command
of the army; he was defeated at Betriacum, where his army surrendered,
but he was pardoned by the enemy, "pietate et ignavia excusatus" (Tac.
H. ii 60).
minorem: the future emperor, Marcus Salvius Otho.
cognominem sibi: having the same cognomen Otho; in Vitell. 2, 2
“cognominis” means having the same nomen.
vixdum nubilem: Roman maidens might be betrothed when mere
children; they were regarded as marriageable from the beginning of the
thirteenth year, and were usually married between the ages of thirteen and
sixteen, fourteen being the average age, though there were instances of
girls being married when under twelve, e.g. Messalina was only eleven
when she married the sixteen-year-old Nero; see the statistics on the
subject given in Friedlaender, Sitteng. iv¹º 133 sqq.
Druso: this son of Germanicus and Agrippina assumed the toga
virilis in 23 A.D.; he and his elder brother Nero were designated as heirs
and successors of Tiberius, but Sejanus, who was ambitious to reign, used
Drusus as a tool to secure the banishment and death of Nero, and then
worked the downfall of Drusus, who was accused of treason to the emperor
and sentenced to death by the senate.
Tiberius did not execute him at
once, but kept him a prisoner in a vault of the palace for some years, and
finally in 33 A.D. had him starved to death (Suet. Tib. 54, 65; Calig. 12;
Tac. A. iv 4, 60; vi 23: Dio lviii 22).
despondit: it is not known whether Drusus married this daughter
of Lucius Otho, but we are told that in 30 A.D. he was already married to
Aemilia Lepida (Dio lviii 3; Tac. A. vi 40, Aemilia Lepida, iuveni Druso
nupta), who was a shameless character driven to suicide through her profligacy; she was amongst those who accused her husband to Tiberius.
CHAPTER 2.
IIII. Kal. Mai.: April 28 (32 A.D.).
Camillo Arruntio: see on c. 1, 2.
Domitio Ahenobarbo: father of the emperor Nero, and husband of
Agrippina daughter of Germanicus (see on Galb. 5, 1); after his consulship (32 A.D., see Vitell. 2, 2) he was proconsul of Sicily; accused of many
crimes, adultery, incest, murder, he only escaped execution through the
death of Tiberius; he died of dropsy (aqua intercus) in 37. Suetonius
(Ner. 5) speaks of him as “omni parte vitae detestabilis," and says that
when his friends congratulated him on the birth of Nero he replied that
nothing that was not abominable and a public bane could be born of
Agrippina and himself.
a prima adulescentia prodigus: Tac. H. i 13, Otho pueritiam incuriose,
adulescentiam petulanter egerat: Plut. Galb. 19, Μάρκος Ὄθων .. τρυφῇ καὶ
φιληδονίαις εὐθὺς ἐκ παίδων ἐν ὀλίγοις ῾Ῥωμαίων (“as few even of the Romans
were") διεφθαρμένος.
flagris: the flagrum or flagellum was a "knout" or "cat" of
knotted cord or wire, the thongs being often loaded with pieces of metal
or knuckle-bones. It was used for the punishment of slaves (Marquardt,
Privatl.2 182).
obiurgaretur: in post-Aug. writers obiurgare is often used of corporal
chastisement; e.g. Suet. Calig. 20, ferulis obiurgari: Pers. v 169, nugaris;
solea puer obiurgabere rubra: Petron. Satyr. 34, colaphis obiurgare puerum
iussit: Sen. Ira iii 12, 6, servulum istum verberibus obiurga.
vagari noctibus solitus: assaults committed by revelling young
"Mohocks" in the streets at night are often referred to by Plautus; e.g.
Stich. 606, Non tu scis, quam adflictentur homines noctu hic in via: Trin.
315, ne noctu irem obambulatum, neu suum adimerem alteri: Amph. 153,
Qui me alter est audacior homo aut quis confidentior, Iuventutis mores
qui sciam, qui hoc noctis solus ambulem? Cf. Juv. iii 278 sqq. Nero was
notorious for his nightly escapades (Ner. 26, Tac. A. xiii 25), as were also
Caligula and Vitellius; cf. Capitol. L. Veri c. 4, in tantum vitiorum
Gaianorum et Neronianorum ac Vitellianorum fuisse aemulum ut vagaretur
nocte per tabernas ac lupanaria
et comissaretur cum triconibus, committeret rixas, etc.
...
potulentum: “drunken"; cf. Apul. Met. iii 5, cum a cena me serius
aliquanto reciperem potulentus. In Cicero potulenta means "drinkables."
N.D. ii 56, 141, gustatus in ea parte oris, qua esculentis et potulentis iter
natura patefecit; cf. Scaevola's definition of “penus," Gell. iv 1, 17,
penus est quod esculentum et potulentum est. The termination -lentus
denotes "full of" (e.g. fraudulentus, vinolentus, opulentus), and so
potulentus more naturally means “full of drink" than "drinkable," and
in Plin. N.H. viii 90 we find "esculentum os” where the meaning is 'filled
with food."
sago iactare: sagatio (Gr. παλμός) was the Roman parallel to our
"tossing in a blanket" (Fr. berner, Germ. prellen, Fuchsprellen). Cf.
Mart. i 3, 8, ibis ab excusso missus in astra sago; Libanius, orat. 58, 18.
The use of the word sagum (a soldier's cloak, see Marquardt, Privatl.2
561, 565) shows that it was originally an amusement of the soldiers (cf.
Friedlaender on Mart. l.c.).
§2. aulicam: see on Dom. 4, 1.
quo coleret, diligere simulavit: colere "to court the favour of,
by showing deference to" is frequently distinguished from diligere “to
love", e.g. Cic. Lael. 53, quis enim aut eum diligat, quem metuat, aut eum,
a quo se metui putet? coluntur tamen simulatione dumtaxat ad tempus:
Plin. Ep. ii 9, 6, diligeris, coleris, frequentaris: Sidon. Ep. iv 4, ipse
hinc amplius capiebatur, quod se diligi magis quam quasi coli intelligebat:
Mart. ii 55, Vis te, Sexte, coli: volebam amare. | Parendum est tibi: quod
iubes, colere: | Sed si te colo, Sexte, non amabo.
anum: used adjectivally as in Ner. 11, 1, anus matronas.
With the
possible exception of Cic. Scaur. 8, uxorem, anum et locupletem et molestam,
this adjectival use is limited to poetry and post-Aug. prose.
per hanc summum locum tenuit: this passage is quoted with a
number of others by Mayor to illustrate Juv. i 38, in caelum quos evehit
optima summi | nunc via processus, vetulae vesica beatae.
insinuatus Neroni: Suetonius always uses insinuare in the passive
(middle) and c. dat.; cf. Calig. 12, 2, insinuatus Macroni: Gramm. 21,
Augusto insinuatus est Melissus: vit. Horat. 3, ac primo Maecenati, deinde
Augusto insinuatus. In earlier writers, from Plautus onward, we find such
phrases as insinuare se in familiaritatem (amicitiam) alicuius; insinuare
se ad aliquem or alicui; and with the reflexive omitted insinuare alicui
(e.g. Cic. de or. i 20, 90, blandiri suppliciter et subtiliter insinuare eis, a
quibus, etc.).
congruentia morum: the friendship of Nero and Otho was a case of
ὁ ὅμοιος τῷ ὁμοίῳ, pares cum paribus. Tacitus says the same thing, H. i 13,
Otho gratus Neroni aemulatione luxus; cf. id. A. xiii 45, Otho pellexit
(Poppaeam) iuventa ac luxu et quia flagrantissimus in amicitia Neronis
habebatur: Dio lxi 11, ἦν δέ τις Μάρκος Σαλούιος ῎Οθων, ὃς οὕτως ἔκ τε τῆς
ὁμοιότητος τῶν τρόπων καὶ τῆς κοινωνίας τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων τῷ Νέρωνι ᾠκείωτο ὥστε,
κ.τ.λ.: Plut. Galb. 19, φίλῳ δὲ τῷ ῎Οθωνι καὶ συμβιωτῇ διὰ τὴν ἀσωτίαν ἐχρῆτο
(ὁ Νέρων).
..
consuetudine stupri: consuetudo (consuetio, Plaut. Amph. 490) is
used in Terence and later writers for intercourse in love (generally illicit
love); cf. Calig. 24, 1, cum omnibus sororibus suis stupri consuetudinem
fecit: Tit. 10, 2, consuetudinem recordatum, quam cum fratris uxore
habuerit: Ner. 35, Octaviae consuetudinem cito aspernatus. The improper
relations between Otho and Nero are often referred to; e.g. Aurel. Vict.
Caes. 7, Neroni quoque quondam criminose familiaris: Juv. ii 99, pathicus
Otho: Mart. vi 32, 2, mollis Otho: Eutrop. vii 17, Otho in privata vita
mollis et Neronis familiaris.
damnatum repetundis: repetundae (sc. pecuniae) denoted the sums of
money claimed as a refund from magistrates or officials who had illegally
extorted it in Rome or the provinces, and so came to denote the illegal
extortion itself. The Lex Calpurnia (149 в.с.) established a perpetua
quaestio to try cases of extortion, the penalty being the payment of the
amount assessed (litis aestimatio) as illegally taken and the forfeit to the
state of the summa sacramenti; the relationship between the Lex Acilia
(c. 123 в.с.) and the Lex Servilia (c. 111 в.с.) is obscure, but between them
the penalty was raised to double the amount and also included exilium;
the Lex Cornelia (of Sulla, 81 B.c.) seems to have made the pecuniary
penalty four times the amount and defined the exilium as aquae et ignis
interdictio; the Lex Iulia (of Caesar, 59 B.c.) repealed the exilium,
retained the litis aestimatio, and ordained that those convicted should lose
their rank and be debarred from being senators, judges, witnesses, etc.;
cf. Suet. Iul. 43, repetundarum convictos etiam ordine senatorio movit.
The Lex Iulia, with some modifications in detail, continued to govern these
prosecutions under the empire, the cases being usually tried by the senate.
This is the only example of damnatus with the simple abl. of the
particular offence, and Ursinus introduced de before repetundis. There is
a similar use of the simple abl. in Tac. A. iii 38, Cordum postulaverat
repetundis, where Nipperdey inserts de. A general term such as crimine
is found with postulare (e.g. Apul. Met. iii 6, vii 3) and Kühner-Stegmann
(i 465) cite Cic. Ph. xiii 27, quo scelere damnatus: id. Cael. 78, absolutus
ambitu: Sen. Controv. i 5, 1, stupro (al. stupri) accusatur: Suet. Ner. 31,
scelere convictos: Sen. Herc. O. 898, scelere (al. sceleris) te misera arguis.
restitutionem: the tech. term for the restoration of rights which have
been forfeited by law: cf. Cic. Agr. ii 4, iudiciorum perturbationes, rerum
iudicatarum infirmationes, restitutio damnatorum; so “restituere," e.g.
Suet. Iul. 41, Caliy. 15, restituere aliquem (damnatum): Claud. 12, restituere
exulem; see also Digest iv 1, 3, “De in integrum restitutionibus.”
Tacitus (H. i 77) mentions that Otho as emperor restored to their places
in the senate some of those convicted of extortion under Claudius and
Nero: redditus Cadio Rufo, Pedio Blaeso, Saevinio Proculo senatorius
locus; repetundarum criminibus sub Claudio ac Nerone ceciderant; and
it is the restitutio of the senatorius locus which is referred to in our
passage.
ad agendas gratias: see on Vesp. 2, 3.
CHAPTER 3.
=
secretorum particeps: cf. Tac. A. i 6, quod postquam Sallustius Crispus
particeps secretorum comperit; so “secretorum conscius,' e.g. Suet.
Tib. 14, 4. In post-Aug. writers secretum is freely used as a subst.
Suetonius has it in the following senses: (a) res secreta "a secret,”
here and in Aug. 66, 3, Tib. 14, 4; (b) = secessus “retirement, seclusion,"
Dom. 3, 1, Tib. 42, 1: 60, Ner. 20, 2, Claud. 10, 1; (c) = locus secretus,
Oth. 10, 2 Vesp. 21; (d) = colloquium secretum, Calig. 23, 2, Tib. 25, 3;
(e) secreta = litterae secretae “private papers," Calig. 49, 3, in secretis
eius reperti sunt duo libelli.
..
die quem Nero destinarat: Nero's various efforts to murder his
mother Agrippina are described in Ner. 34. Having thrice failed to poison
her, he introduced a mechanical device in the ceiling of her bedroom by
which the panels would fall on her as she slept, but this design leaked
out. He then invited her to Baiae during the festival of the Quinquatrus
(March 19-23), and arranged that the vessel on which she came should be
run into after her arrival so that it could not be used on her return. In
the evening she was entertained to dinner (Suetonius here says by Otho)
and when the time came for her to return to Bauli, Nero put her on
board a collapsible vessel which would cause her death either by its
breaking in pieces or by the falling in of its cabin (solutilis navis, cuius
vel naufragio vel camerae ruina periret); she managed, however, to swim
ashore. Finally, in the same year 59 A.D., he had her stabbed to death,
everything being arranged to make it appear that she had committed
suicide in consequence of the failure of a plot of hers to assassinate Nero.
See also Tac. 4. xiv 1-9, where the details are given somewhat differently.
necandae matri: the use of the dative of the gerundive to express
end or object, which is comparatively infrequent in pre-class. and class.
Lat., is increasingly common from Livy on, especially in Tacitus. For
other examples in Suetonius see Dom. 8,2; Vesp. 5, 3:8,5:10; Tit. 8, 4.
Kühner-Stegmann (i 746 sqq.) give numerous instances of this dat. with
such phrases as comitia edico, indico, habeo; diem dico, indico, statuo;
dies venit; tempus do; locum eligo, do, relinquo; finem facio.
ad avertendas suspiciones: according to Tacitus (A. xiv 4) Agrippina
had heard of the plot and in doubt whether she was to believe it she
went by litter and not by boat from Bauli to Baiae. There some soothing
words from Nero allayed her fears. Dio (lxi 12) says that Nero had
brought her with him by sea from Antium to Bauli, using the ship which
had been prepared for the murder, in order to accustom her to it.
cenam dedit: in the narrative in Ner. 34 Suetonius does not mention
that the banquet was given by Otho, and it is not in Tacitus or Dio;
moreover, this account of Otho acting as host to Nero and Agrippina in
59 A.D. contradicts Tacitus (A. xiii 46) who records the sending of Otho
to Lusitania among the events of 58, and it is also irreconcilable with
what Suetonius says below of the duration of Otho's governorship of
Lusitania per decem annos ending in the summer of 68. Furneaux (on
Tac. A. xiv 4) suggests that the story about Otho, if true at all, is to be
referred to some previous attempt on Agrippina's life.
exquisitissimae comitatis: Dio (lxi 13), τὴν μητέρα . . φιλοφρόνως εἰστίασεν
(ὁ Νέρων): Tac. (l.c.), comiter excepta (Agrippina) superque ipsum
(Neronem) collocata. Iam pluribus sermonibus, modo familiaritate iuvenili
Nero et rursus adductus ("grave"), quasi seria consociaret, tracto in
longum convictu, etc. Comitas was a characteristic of the dinners given
by Augustus; cf. Aug. 74, cenam ternis ferculis ("courses'") aut cum
abundissime senis praebebat, ut non nimio sumptu, ita summa comitate.
Poppaeam Sabinam: a daughter of T. Ollius, who perished with
Sejanus, but she took the name of her maternal grandfather Poppaeus
Sabinus (cons. 9 A.D.). Married first to Rufrius Crispinus, she became the
mistress and wife of Otho and mistress and wife of Nero. She induced
Nero to murder his mother Agrippina, and to divorce and put to death
his wife Octavia. In 63 A.D. she bore to him a son who only lived four
months, and when she was again with child in 65 she met her death through
Nero kicking her in a fit of rage. Tacitus (A. xiii 45) gives a well-known
description of her: Huic mulieri cuncta alia fuere praeter honestum
animum. Quippe mater eius, aetatis suae feminas pulchritudine supergressa, gloriam pariter et formam dederat; opes claritudini generis sufficiebant. Sermo comis nec absurdum ingenium: modestiam praeferre et
lascivia uti. Rarus in publicum egressus, idque velata parte oris, ne
satiaret adspectum, vel quia sic decebat. Famae numquam pepercit,
maritos et adulteros non distinguens; neque adfectui suo aut alieno
obnoxia, unde utilitas ostenderetur, illuc libidinem transferebat.
tunc adhuc amicam eius: conflicting accounts are given of the exact
relationship which existed between Poppaea, Nero, and Otho.
In his.
earlier work, the Histories (i 13), Tacitus calls her "the imperial
mistress," whom Nero had entrusted to Otho until he himself could get
rid of his wife Octavia and marry again: Otho pueritiam incuriose,
adulescentiam petulanter egerat, gratus Neroni aemulatione luxus. Eoque
Poppaeam Sabinam, principale scortum, ut apud conscium libidinum,
deposuerat, donec Octaviam uxorem amoliretur. In the Annals (xiii 45-6),
however, he says that while her husband Crispinus was still alive she was
attracted to Otho by his youth and extravagance and by the fact that he
was such an ardent friend of Nero (whom she may have hoped to captivate).
This intrigue with Otho was followed at once by their marriage.
Nero,.
inflamed by Otho's praises of his wife's beauty, sent for Poppaea and
fell a complete victim to her charm. She in coquettish fashion pretended
that she could not be his, as she was a married woman, and so Nero, to
get rid of Otho and have sole possession of her, sent him as governor to
Lusitania. (See Fabia, “L'adultère de Néron et de Poppée," Rev. de
Phil. 1896 p. 12 sqq., who thinks the account in the Annals is based on
more accurate information). Dio (lxi 11) agrees fairly closely with
Suetonius and Tacitus in the Histories, saying that Poppaea was taken
from her first husband (Crispinus) by Nero and given to Otho and that
thus she became the joint mistress of them both (αὐτῇ ἀμφότεροι ἅμα ἐχρῶντο).
So too Plutarch (Galb. 19) states that Nero fell in love with her while she was
wife to Crispinus, but retaining as yet some respect for his own wife-
(Octavia) and fearing his mother (Agrippina) he employed Otho to solicit
her. Otho seduced her, promising her that through him she would have Nero
as a lover, and persuaded her to leave her husband and marry him. Having
married her, he became so jealously fond of her that he would not brook
even the emperor as a sharer of her affection, and he was in imminent
danger of his life through thwarting Nero's desires; his appointment to
Lusitania saved him from death.
marito: Rufrius Crispinus, a prefect of the praetorians in the reign
of Claudius, who was rewarded with “sestertium quindecies et insignia
praeturae" for the arrest of Valerius Asiaticus (Tac. A. xi 1 and 4). He
was banished by Nero after the conspiracy of Piso in 65, occasione coniurationis, sed Neroni invisus, quod Poppaeam quondam matrimonio
tenuerat (A. xv 71). He committed suicide in Sardinia when Nero sent
orders for his death (A. xvi 17).
demandatam: demandare (= committere, tradere, παρακατατιθέναι) is
first found in the title of a play of Caecilius “Demandati''; Livy is the
next writer in whom it occurs, e.g. v 27, plures pueri
unius curae
demandabantur. Suetonius uses it more frequently than any other author;
e.g. Ner. 35, 5, privignum mergendum mari. servis ipsius demandavit:
Tib. 51, 2, quibus ea funeris sui curam moriens demandarat: Calig. 9,
ablegari eum.. et in proximam civitatem demandari (= servandum tradi).
..
nuptiarum specie: this version of the story makes Nero arrange
that Otho was to go through a form of marriage with Poppaea, and was
then merely to hold her in trust and inviolate until Nero, freed from
Octavia and Agrippina, was ready to take her over.
nec corrupisse contentus: poets and post-Aug. prose writers use the
infinitive with contentus (= satis habens).
In Aug. 82 Suetonius has
contentus hoc erat ut. Here, as frequently, corrumpere is used in the
sense of διαφθείρειν γυναῖκα.
adeo dilexit, ut: Plutarch describes how Otho chafed at the thought
of sharing his loved one with any other, and how Poppaea was pleased
with this jealous love: ἐλθούσης δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτὸν ὡς γαμετῆς οὐκ ἠγάπα μετέχων, ἀλλ᾽
ἤσγαλλε μεταδιδούς, οὐδὲ αὐτῆς ἀχθομένης, ὥς φασι, τῇ ζηλοτυπίᾳ τῆς Ποππαίας.
When emperor, Otho still cherished the memory of Poppaea; cf. Tac. H. i
78, ne tum quidem immemor amorum statuas Poppaeae per senatus consultum reposuit.
§2. creditur non recepisse: according to Plutarch it was Poppaea
who refused to admit Nero when Otho was absent: καὶ γὰρ ἀποκλεῖσαι τὸν
Νέρωνα λέγεται μὴ παρόντος τοῦ Ὄθωνος, εἴτε τῆς ἡδονῆς ἀφαιροῦσα τὸ πλήσιμον,
εἴτε, ὥς φασιν ἔνιοι, βαρυνομένη τὸν Καίσαρος γάμον, ἐραστῇ δὲ μὴ φεύγουσα χρῆσθαι
διὰ τὸ φιλακόλαστον. Plutarch's account agrees with what Tacitus says
in his later version (A. xiii 46) of Poppaea discouraging Nero ‘‘nuptam
esse se dictitans nec posse matrimonium amittere." See Hardy on Plut.
l.c.
depositum: cf. Tac. H. i 13, Sabinam (apud Othonem) deposuerat
(Nero). "depositum” was used of persons as well as things; e.g. in
Luc. ii 71 (of Marius hiding in the marshes of Minturnae) stagna avidi
texere soli laxaeque paludes | depositum, Fortuna, tuum: Sen. Controv. ii
4, 1, accede huc, puer, depositum, crimen meum: Stat. Ach. i 385 (of the
young Achilles entrusted to Lycomedes king of Scyros), depositumque
ingens timido commisimus astu.
reposcentem: so "poscere," Hor. C. i 24, 10, tu frustra pius heu non
ita creditum | poscis Quintilium deos. One who denied or refused to return
a deposit was called infitiator, e.g. Mart. i 103, 11, In ius, o fallax atque
infitiator, eamus; cf. Juv. xiii '60, si depositum non infitietur amicus.
diducto matrimonio: cf. Sen. Controv. ii 5, 1, nuptias tyrannicidium
diduxit, quas non diduxit tyrannus: Hor. C. iii 9, 18, quid si prisca redit
Venus diductosque iugo cogit aeneo?: Prop. ii 7, 3, diducere amantes |
non queat invitos Iuppiter.
sepositus est: for this use of seponere see on Tit. 9, 3.
per causam legationis: cf. Tac. H. i 13, mox suspectum (Othonem) in
eadem Poppaea in provinciam Lusitaniam specie legationis seposuit. For
“per causam” see on Vesp. i. Plutarch (Galb. 20) says that it was Seneca
who saved Otho from the jealous Nero by getting him appointed governor:
Σενέκαν δὲ εἶχεν εὔνουν, κἀκείνου τὸν Νέρωνα πείσαντος καὶ παραινέσαντος ἐξεπέμφθη
Λυσιτανῶν στρατηγός (legatus) ἐπὶ τὸν ᾿Ωκεανόν. Tacitus (A. xiii 46) describes
how Otho was cut off from Nero's familiar intercourse, and later excluded
from interviews or levées and from the imperial suite, and finally was
made governor of Lusitania that he might not be the emperor's rival at
Rome: deicitur familiaritate sueta, post congressu et comitatu Otho, et ad
postremum, ne in urbe aemulatus ageret, provinciae Lusitaniae praeficitur.
Lusitaniam: Lusitania, which earlier was included in Hispania
Ulterior, was made into a separate imperial province by Augustus. It
comprised nearly all Portugal and a part of Spain (Salamanca and
northern Estremadura). The capital was Emerita Augusta (Merida), a
colony of veterans founded by Augustus; and Olisipo (Lisbon) and Pax
Iulia (Beja) were important towns.
id: a correction by Casaubon of et (which is kept by Ihm).
poena acrior: i.e. death, cf. Plut. Galb. 19, ἐκινδύνευσεν οὖν ὁ Ὄθων
ἀποθανεῖν· καὶ παράλογον ἦν, ὅτι τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ ἀδελφὴν ἀποκτείνας διὰ τὸν
Ποππαίας γάμον ἐφείσατο τοῦ Ὄθωνος.
mimum omnem divulgaret: mimus is used occasionally in post-Aug.
writers for farcical proceedings or shams of any kind; e.g. Calig. 45 (of
Caligula's pretended military triumphs), in hoc quoque mimo praeter modum
intemperans: Tib. 24, principatum, quamvis neque occupare confestim
neque agere dubitasset, et statione militum, hoc est vi et specie dominationis assumpta, diu tamen recusavit impudentissimo mimo (so Gronovius,
animo MSS): Plin. N.H. vii 53, Antiocho regi Syriae e plebe nomine
Artemon in tantum similis fuit, ut Laodice coniux regia, necato iam
Antiocho, mimum per eum commendationis regnique successionis peregerit:
Flor. ii 14, Pseudophilippus regiam formam regium nomen mimo (so
Gronov., animo MSS.) quoque regio implevit.
disticho: the subst. distichon (distichum), δίστιχον, was used by
Martial, Suetonius, Ausonius, etc. for a couplet of any kind of verse (not
merely an elegiac couplet, as Lewis and Short say); e.g. in Suet. Iul. 51
of two trochaic septenarii: Suet. (?) vit. Verg. 58 of two hexameters. The
adj. distichos (-us), δίστιχοs, occurs in Varro Men. 398, etiam distichon
epigrammation vocant pоета. These lines on Otho seem modelled on
Ov. R.A. 161 sq.: Quaeritis Aegisthus quare sit factus adulter?
promptu causa est: desidiosus erat.
In
..
mentito exul honore: Plutarch (Galb. 20) says that Otho quite
realised that his governorship was only a specious name and a mere disguise
for banishment, and so took care not to make himself disagreeable or
oppressive to the provincials: παρέσχεν ἑαυτὸν οὐκ ἄχαριν οὐδὲ ἐπαχθῆ τοῖς
ὑπηκόοις, εἰδὼς φυγῆς ὑποκόρισμα καὶ παρακάλυμμα τὴν ἀρχὴν αὐτῷ διδομένην. Cf.
Tac. H. i 21 (considerations which influenced Otho in making a bid for
empire), praegravem se Neroni fuisse nec Lusitaniam rursus et alterius
exilii honorem expectandum.
provinciam administravit
moderatione: his administration is
praised by Tacitus also; H. i 13, comiter administrata provincia; A. xiii 46,
provinciae Lusitaniae praeficitur, ubi usque ad civilia arma non ex ("in
accordance with'") priore infamia sed integre sancteque egit, procax otii et
potestatis temperantior ("a wanton in respect of his hours of idleness,
more self-controlled in respect of his official life." Furneaux).
quaestorius: Lusitania was an imperial province of the second class,
and as such its governor was normally a man of praetorian rank (legatus
Augusti propraetore); Otho had held nothing higher than the quaestorship,
and was only 26 years of age when appointed.
per decem annos: 58-68 A.D. For lengthy tenures of governorships of
imperial provinces see on Galb. 9, 1. Nero, of course, had a special reason
for keeping Otho away from Rome.
abstinentia: opp. to avaritia; see on Tit. 7, 3, abstinuit alieno.
CHAPTER 4.
conatibus Galbae primus accessit: Tac. H. i 13, primus in partes
(Galbae) transgressus nec, donec (“as long as") bellum fuit, segnis et
inter praesentes splendidissimus (i.e. most conspicuous of Galba's
followers): Plut. Galb. 20, ἀποστάντος δὲ Γάλβα πρῶτος αὐτὸς προσεχώρησε
τῶν ἡγεμόνων (“provincial governors''). Plutarch adds that Otho brought
with him all his gold and silver vessels to be melted down and coined for
Galba's use, and presented him with such of his servants as knew best
how to wait upon an emperor; his fidelity and experience were invaluable
to Galba, and he accompanied him during all his journey from Spain,
driving in the same carriage with him for many days.
et ex condicione: et (= etiam or vel) is omitted in some of the MSS.
and of the older editions.
Seleuci: the name of this astrologer is given as Ptolemaeus by
Tacitus and Plutarch. Seleucus was the name of Vespasian's trusty
astrologer (Tac. H. ii 78), and Suetonius may have confused the two.
Juvenal (vi 557 sqq.) refers to Otho's astrologer without mentioning his
name: Praecipuus tamen est horum (sc. astrologorum), qui saepius exul, [
cuius amicitia conducendaque tabella | magnus civis obit et formidatus
Othoni, “by whose friendship and by whose venal horoscope a great citizen
(i.e. Galba) died, one whom Otho dreaded." Duff. The great influence
of the mathematici, or astrologers, in persuading Otho to seize the empire
is described in Tac. H. i 22: urgentibus etiam mathematicis, dum novos
motus et clarum Othoni annum observatione siderum adfirmant, genus
hominum potentibus infidum, sperantibus fallax, quod in civitate nostra
et vetabitur semper et retinebitur. Multos secreta Poppaeae mathematicos,
pessimum principalis matrimonii instrumentum, habuerant; e quibus
Ptolemaeus Othoni in Hispania comes, cum superfuturum eum Neroni promisisset, postquam ex eventu fides, coniectura iam et rumore senium Galbae
et iuventam Othonis computantium persuaserat fore ut in imperium
ascisceretur. Sed Otho tamquam peritia et monitu fatorum praedicta
accipiebat, cupidine ingenii humani libentius obscura credendi.
Plutarch
(Galb. 23) also mentions the two predictions of Ptolemaeus that Otho
would survive Nero and that he would become emperor.
mathematici: see on Vitell. 14, 4.
superstitem Neroni: for the dat. cf. Calig. 7, liberi superstites patri;
Suetonius also uses the gen. in Tib. 62, 3, superstes omnium suorum.
Cicero and Tacitus have both constructions; see Kühner-Stegmann, i
448 sq.
repromittens: Baumg.-Cr. explains this as insuper promittens or novo
promisso spondens, a meaning which the word does not seem to bear elsewhere. repromittere was properly a mercantile term for binding oneself
to do something in return for a certain consideration; e.g. Plaut. Asin.
453, verum istuc argentum tamen mihi si vis denumerare, | repromittam
istoc nomine solutam rem futuram: Cic. Rosc. Com. 13, 37; Suet. Claud.
20, 2, cum quidam privato sumptu emissuros (i.e. that they would drain
the Fucine Lake) se repromitterent, si sibi siccati agri concederentur. It
was also used merely as a more emphatic form of promittere, e.g. Plin.
Εp. iv 27, ad hunc gustum totum librum repromitto (“I guarantee that
the whole book is up to the level of this extract'"), and this may be the
meaning here and in Tib. 17, 2, eo (cognomine) contentum repromittens
quod se defuncto suscepturus esset (i.e. Augustus promised that Tiberius
would be satisfied with the title which he would receive on Augustus'
death), though there Rolfe translates repromittens ‘‘reiterating the promise," while Bentley and Madvig would read contentum fore promittens;
similarly in the present passage Madvig proposed imperatorem
promittens.
fore
§ 2. nullo
genere omisso: Tacitus describes the sedulous efforts of
Otho to make himself popular with the army, H. i 23, studia militum iam
pridem spe successionis aut paratu facinoris adfectaverat, in itinere (from
Spain), in agmine, in stationibus vetustissimum quemque militum nomine
vocans ac memoria Neroniani comitatus (their companionship under Nero's
régime) contubernales appellando; alios agnoscere, quosdam requirere et
pecunia aut gratia iuvare, inserendo saepius querellas et ambiguos de Galba
sermones, quaeque alia turbamenta volgi: ib. 36, nec deerat Otho protendens manus adorare volgum, iacere oscula, et omnia serviliter pro
dominatione. So Plutarch (Galb. 20) tells how Otho was affable and
obliging to everyone (παρέχων ἑαυτὸι· εὐπροσήγορον καὶ φιλάνθρωπον ἅπασιν), and
how he specially courted the favour (ἐξεθεράπευσεν) of Vinius (see Suet.
Galb. 14, 2) and got preferment for the soldiers from Vinius and the
influential freedmen Icelus and Asiaticus.
officii: 'attentiveness,” attentions"; cf. Iul. 26,2, nullum officiorum
in quemquam genus omisit: ib. 19, 2, omnibus officiis Pompeium assectatus
est: Aug. 61, 2, cum praecipua officia vivae praestitisset.
ambitionis: “favour-seeking,” “popularity-hunting"; cf. Aug. 25, 3,
murales coronas quam parcissime et sine ambitione tribuit: Iul. 28, 3,
quod per ambitionem data esset (civitas): Tib. 21, 2, ambitione tractus,
ut tali successore desiderabilior ipse quandoque fieret.
quotiens cena principem acciperet: cf. Plut. Galb. 20, ὁσάκις δὲ τὸν Γάλβαν
εἱστία, τὴν παραφυλάττουσαν ἀεὶ σπεῖραν (“cohort") ἐδέκαζε ("bribed") χρυσοῦν
ἑκάστῳ διανέμων, οἷς τιμᾶν αὐτὸν (i.e. Galba) ἐδόκει καταπολιτευόμενος καὶ δημαγωγῶν
τὸ στρατιωτικόν. Tacitus (H. i 24) says this bribery was done through the
agency of Maevius Pudens, an associate of Tigellinus: Flagrantibus iam
militum animis velut faces addiderat Maevius Pudens, e proximis Tigellini.
Is mobilissimum quemque ingenio aut pecuniae indigum et in novas cupiditates praecipitem alliciendo eo paulatim progressus est, ut per speciem
convivii, quotiens Galba apud Othonem epularetur, cohorti excubias agenti
viritim centenos nummos divideret; quam velut publicam largitionem
Otho secretioribus apud singulos praemiis intendebat. For quotiens see
on Galb. 10, 2.
aureos: see on Galb. 20, 2; an aureus was equivalent to centeni nummi,
100 sesterces, the amount stated by Tac. l.c.
excubanti cohorti: sc. praetoriae; one praetorian cohort at a time
acting as a guard for the emperor at his palace (c. 6, 1) and accompanying
him to other houses. The emperors gave to their guards the sportula, or
allowance for food, given to clients by patrons (Dom. 7, 1); and Otho,
when he was entertaining Galba, took upon himself to play the patron's
part towards the guards in attendance on the emperor by bestowing upon
them an extravagantly lavish allowance; cf. the words of Tacitus quoted
above, “per speciem convivii" (= titulo sportularum).
cuidam litiganti: Tacitus (H. i 24) gives his name and says that
he was one of the imperial bodyguard: adeo animosus corruptor (Otho)
ut Cocceio Proculo speculatori de parte finium cum vicino ambigenti universum vicini agrum sua pecunia emptum dono dederit, per socordiam praefecti (i.e. Laco, see on Galb. 14, 2), quem nota pariter et occulta fallebant.
arbiter: an “arbiter ex compromisso” to whom the parties agree to
leave the decision of the dispute; a magistrate could also refer a case to
one arbiter or to more than one, to have it decided in accordance with
the principles of bona fides.
emancipavit: Torrentius, ingeniously but needlessly, conjectured eique
mancipavit. The compound emancipare is used here of the conveyance of
land, as in Quintil. vi 3, 44, omnes autem illas (possessiones) Brutus
vendiderat; et tum paterna emancipare praedia turpius habebatur: Plin.
Ep. x 4, fundos emancipavit et cetera quae in emancipatione implenda
solent exigi consummavit, i.e. he went through all the formalities of a
fictitious sale (mancipatio per aes et libram) which required the presence
of the vendor (qui mancipio dat) and the purchaser (qui mancipio accipit),
five witnesses, and a libripens with the scales; the "purchaser" placed a
sesterce in the scales held by the libripens and said "hanc ego rem ex
iure Quiritium meam esse aio, eaque mihi empta est hoc aere aeneaque
libra." See Hardy on Plin. loc. cit. The various senses of emancipare
are illustrated in Roby, Rom. Priv. Law, i 75 sqq.
..
qui non sentiret dignum: this was also the universal opinion with
regard to Galba before he became emperor; cf. the familiar words of
Tacitus (H. i 49), maior privato visus, dum privatus fuit, et omnium consensu capax imperii, nisi imperasset.
CHAPTER 5.
..
speraverat ut adoptaretur: Galba's choice of an adopted son and
successor is described in Galb. 17, where see notes. Otho's hopes were
based on Vinius (Galb. 14, 2), whose daughter Crispina was betrothed to
him (Tac. H. i 13, Plut. Galb. 21), and on the support of the soldiers and
of Nero's courtiers who recognised in him a kindred nature to Nero, cf.
Tac. (l.c.), Otho
spem adoptionis statim conceptam acrius in dies
rapiebat, faventibus plerisque militum, prona in eum aula Neronis ut
similem.
Pisone praelato: Plutarch (Galb. 21) says that in preferring him
Galba was actuated, as always, by the consideration of what was best for
the state: ὁ δὲ Γάλβας ἀεὶ μὲν ἦν δῆλος πρὸ τοῦ ἰδίου τὸ κοινὸν τιθέμενος καὶ ζητῶν
οὐχ αὑτῷ θέσθαι (“ to adopt") τὸν ἥδιστον, ἀλλὰ ῾Ῥωμαίοις τὸν ὠφελιμώτατον.
spe decidit: where decidere is used in earlier writers in this metaphorical sense it takes a preposition; Ter. Heaut. 250, quanta de spe
decidi!: Liv. xxxvii 26, Antiochus postquam a spe societatis Prusiae
decidit.
animi dolorem: Otho's indignation when he heard the announcement
of the adoption of Piso is described in Plut. Galb. 23, τοῦ Ὄθωνος ἐπεφαίνετο
πολλὰ σημεῖα τῇ μορφῇ πικρῶς καὶ σὺν ὀργῇ τῆς ἐλπίδος τὴν ἀπότευξιν φέροντος, ἧς
πρῶτος ἀξιωθεὶς καὶ τοῦ τυχεῖν ἐγγυτάτω γενόμενος τὸ μὴ τυχεῖν ἐποιεῖτο σημεῖον
ἔχθους ἅμα καὶ κακονοίας τοῦ Γάλβα πρὸς αὐτόν: Dio lxiv 5, ἀγανακτήσας ὅτι μὴ
αὐτὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ Γάλβα ἐπεποίητο, ἀρχὴν αὖθις μυρίων τοῖς ῾Ρωμαίοις κακῶν παρέσχεν.
=
magnitudine aeris alieni: Plut. c. 21, πεντακισχιλίων μυριάδων ὀφλήμασι
βεβαπτισμένος (mersus, obrutus), i.e. 50,000,000 drachmae, 200,000,000
sesterces, about £1,700,000. Tacitus (H. i 21) mentions Otho's ‘luxuria
etiam principi onerosa, inopia vix privato toleranda.”
stare: see on Vesp. 16, 3, professus quadringenties milies opus esse,
ut res p. stare posset.
ab hoste.. caderet: cadere ab (= interfici ab, cf. ἀποθανεῖν ὑπό, πίπτειν
ὑπό) is a poet. constr. very rare in prose: cf. Tac. A. xvi 9, donec a
centurione caderet; Sen. Phaedr. 556, a fratre frater, dextera nati
parens | cecidit; Ov. Her. ix 36, infesto ne vir ab hoste cadat; xii 18;
Met. v 192; Fast. vi 564; Val. Fl. viii 317; (by an oversight in the
Thes. Ling. Lat. Livy xxv 19, 5, plures ab Romanis primo incursu equitum
ceciderunt, is cited as an ex. of this constr., but there ab Romanis means
"on the side of the R.'"). Bentley would alter ab to sub in our passage.
in Foro: in the Forum the bankers (mensarii, argentarii) and merchants
(negotiatores) transacted their business; there, too, the courts were held
and the praetor dealt with the affairs of insolvent debtors. Cf. Foro
mersus “bankrupt" (Plaut. Epid. 118), and the common phrase cedere
Foro "to become bankrupt."
sub creditoribus caderet: the late Lat. constr. cadere sub aliquo, where
sub is used in an instrumental sense, was a development of the use of
sub to denote attendant circumstances (Kühner-Stegmann, i 571); cf.
Flor. iv 4, sub percussore mori.
=
§2. dispensatione: officio dispensatoris; for such trafficking in
appointments to imperial stewardships see also Vesp. 23, 2. Instances of
т2
the great wealth accumulated by dispensatores are given by Friedlaender,
Sitteng. i10 p. 70.
decies sestertium:
about £8,500.
= decies centena milia sestertium, 1,000,000 sesterces,
speculatoribus: "bodyguard"; see on Galb. 18, 1.
quinque: according to Tac. (H. i 25) there were only two in the first
instance, and afterwards a few others were admitted to the plot: Sed
tum e libertis Onomastum futuro sceleri praefecit (Otho), a quo Barbium
Proculum tesserarium speculatorum et Veturium optionem ("deputy
centurion'') eorundem perductos, postquam vario sermone callidos audacesque cognovit, pretio et promissis onerat, data pecunia ad pertemptandos
plurium animos. Suscepere duo manipulares ("common soldiers'")
imperium populi Romani transferendum et transtulerunt. In conscientiam
facinoris pauci adsciti, etc.
repraesentata: "paid in ready money (praesens pecunia)''; cf. Aug.
101, 2, quam summam repraesentari iussit; Calig. 16, 3; Claud. 18, 1;
Ner. 5, 2; 44, 2. Suetonius also uses the word in its wider sense of
"doing a thing at once,” lit. “bringing it from the future into the
present"; Calig. 58, 1, repraesentare spectaculum voluit; Claud. 34, 1,
tormenta quaestionum poenasque parricidarum repraesentabat exigebatque
coram; ib. 37, 2, quasi plane repraesentaretur somnii fides (i.e. as if the
truth of the dream were being proved at once); Ner. 21, 1, (Nero) repraesentaturum se pollicitus est (i.e. promised that he would sing at once);
Vitell. 10, 12, verbera et plagas, saepe vulnera, nonnunquam necem repraesentantes adversantibus.
quinquagena: sc. sestertia, 50,000 sesterces, about £425.
nec adeo multi: "but not so very many"; cf. Aug. 65, 2, C. Lucique
casu non adeo fractus: ib. 88, orthographiam
non adeo custodit: Galb.
7, 1, valitudo neque adeo gravis. The use of non perinde is similar (see
on Galb. 13); so too non (haud, nec, etc.) ita is used in this way very
frequently, e.g. Cic. Fam. i 9, 3, non ita magna mercede: Cic. Phil. i 3, 7,
nón ita multum provectus. Both Tacitus (H. i 27) and Plutarch (Galb. 25)
say that Otho was saluted as emperor at first by only 23 speculatores who
carried him off to the camp of the praetorians, their number being increased
on the way by other soldiers joining them (see on Oth. 6, 3, obvio quoque
adhaerente); they also mention that Otho himself was dismayed by the
small number who originally sided with him, and Plut. says that he would
have backed out of the venture had he been allowed by the soldiers to do
so. Cf. also Dio (Xiph.) lxiv 5, ὑπό τινων στρατιωτῶν ὀλίγων, οἳ συνωμωμόκεσαν
αὐτῷ, ἐς τὸ τεῖχος (murum castrorum) ἐσήχθη : Zon. xi 14, ὁ δὲ Ὄθων . . ἐπανέστη
αὐτῷ (i.e. Galba) τριάκοντα μόνους στρατιώτας ἑτοιμασάμενος.
..
fiducia plures adfuturos: Gruter aptly quotes Tac. A. iv 7, primas
dominandi spes in arduo: ubi sis ingressus, adesse studia et ministros;
cf. also Tac. H. i 55, insita mortalibus natura propere sequi quae piget
inchoare. The acc. c. inf. depending on fiducia occurs earlier in Ov.
A.A. i 269, prima tuae menti veniat fiducia cunctas | posse capi: ib. ii 349:
Liv. xxxvi 7: Sen. Ep. 32, 2, habeo quidem fiduciam non posse te detorqueri:
Tac. A. xi 28, ipsa facilitas imperatoris fiduciam dabat posse opprimi
damnatam ante quam ream. Suetonius uses the same constr. with fides,
persuasio, suspicio, rumor, opinio, spes, metus, mos, religio, etc.
..
CHAPTER 6.
tulerat animus occupare: the expression animus fert (only here in
Suet.) is mainly poetical, though found a few times in Sall. and Liv.; cf.
Ov. Her. xiii 85, volui revocare animusque ferebat: Hor. E. i 14, 8: Sall.
Cat. 58, 6, diutius in his locis esse, si maxime animus ferat, frumenti ..
egestas prohiberet: Sall. Iug. 54, 4: Liv. xxiii 15, xxx 12, xl 4. It is
used with the inf., as here, in Ov. Met. i 1, In nova fert animus mutatas
dicere formas | corpora: Luc. i 67: Pers. iv 7. Some of our MSS. have
erat for tulerat, and Ursinus read fuerat (cf. Iul. 82, 4, fuerat animus
coniuratis corpus occisi in Tiberim trahere).
post adoptionem statim: Piso was adopted by Galba on Jan. 10,
69 A.D., and on Jan. 15 Galba was slain and Otho was proclaimed emperor
by the soldiers. The design which Suetonius here attributes to Otho of
attacking Galba immediately after the adoption is not mentioned elsewhere; Tacitus (H. i 26) says that the conspirators had thoughts of
carrying off Otho to the camp on the evening of Jan. 14, but refrained:
adeoque parata apud malos seditio, etiam apud integros dissimulata fuit,
ut postero iduum die redeuntem a cena Othonem rapturi fuerint, ni incerta
noctis et tota urbe sparsa militum castra nec facilem inter temulentos
consensum timuissent.
castra: i.e. the castra praetoria; see on Galb. 19, 1.
excubabat: cf. c. 4, 2.
statione: used here for the period of duty during which one out of
the twelve praetorian cohorts acted as guard at the imperial palace. Other
meanings of statio in Suet. are: (1) posts where soldiers are stationed as
guards; e.g. Iul. 32, cum plurimi etiam ex stationibus milites concucurrissent: (2) the soldiers stationed as guards; e.g. Aug. 32, 1, dispositis
per opportuna loca stationibus: (3) more especially the soldiers stationed
as guards at the palace, e.g. Tib. 24, 1, statione militum, hoc est vi et
specie dominationis, assumpta: Ner. 21, 1, adiuvante vulgi preces etiam
statione militum, quae tunc excubabat: (4) metaph. of station or position;
Claud. 38, 3, pervenire ad susceptam stationem (= susceptum munus
imperii).
Gaius fuerat occisus: the two conspirators who took the leading
part in the assassination of Gaius Caligula were Cassius Chaerea and
Cornelius Sabinus, who were both tribunes of a cohort of the praetorian
guard. The two prefects of the praetorian guard had been accused of
complicity in an earlier conspiracy against that emperor (Calig. 56 and 58).
desertus Nero: Nero tried to induce the tribunes and centurions of
the praetorian guard to accompany him in a last despairing flight from
Rome, but they either openly refused or gave evasive answers; one even
exclaimed in the words of Virgil "Usque adeone mori miserum est?”
Waking at midnight, he found that his guard had left (comperit stationem
recessisse), and he fled from the city with only four faithful attendants
(Ner. 47).
medium tempus: between Jan. 10 and Jan. 15; see on Galb. 17, intra
sextum adoptionis diem.
religio: portents, evil omens; cf. Ner. 19, 1, turbatus religione simul
ac periculo ("by a threatening portent'"): Tib. 2, 2, per contemptum
religionis (''in defiance of the portent'"): Oth. 8, 3. It is not necessary
to assume a reference to “dies religiosi” (Claud. 14, Tib. 61, 2), i.e. days
in the Roman year which were unfavourable for any undertaking, generally
because they were dedicated to the worship of the gods of the underworld
or were associated with some historical disaster to the Roman people and
so were dies atri or vitiosi, e.g. the day of the battle of the Allia, July 18
(Vitell. 11, 2); other dies religiosi were the dies postriduani (Vitell. '8, 1, n.).
See Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 295.
Seleucus: the astrologer; see c. 4, 1.
exemit: eximere diem, tempus, etc., meant to take away a day, etc.,
from a purpose for which it might have been used, and so to waste it;
cf. Liv. i 50, 8, quia ea res exemisset illum diem: Cic. Q. Fr. ii 4, Lentulus
dies comitiales exemit omnes: Cic. Phil. vi 3, 7, horam eximere ullam in
tali cive liberando sine scelere non possumus: Sen. N. Q. iii 1, damna
aetatis male exemptae labor sarciat. To "talk out" a bill in the senate
was “diem dicendo eximere” (Cic. Att. iv 3, Q. Fr. ii 1).
§ 2. sub aede Saturni: this temple of Saturn was dedicated in 497 B.c.
(Liv. ii 21, Dion. Hal. vi 1); it was situated “sub clivo Capitolino” (Serv.
on Aen. ii 115, viii 319: Varr. L.L. v 42: Fest. p. 322 Müll.: Dion. Hal. i
34, παρὰ τῇ ῥίζῃ τοῦ λόφου κατὰ τὴν ἄνοδον τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς ἀγορᾶς (Fori) φέρουσαν εἰς
τὸ Καπιτώλιον). Munatius Plancus restored it under Augustus (Suet. Aug.
29). See Jordan, Topogr. Rom i 2, 360 sqq.
miliarium aureum: cf. Tac. H. i 27, Otho .. ad miliarium aureum sub
aedem Saturni pergit. This miliarium or milepost of bronze gilt was
erected at the upper end of the Forum by Augustus as curator viarum
in 20 B.C.; cf. Dio liv 8, προστάτης τῶν περὶ τὴν ῾Ρώμην ὁδῶν αἱρεθεὶς τὸ
χρυσοῦν μίλιον κεκλημένον ἔστησε. Plutarch (Galb. 24) describes it as the
centre at which all the roads of Italy terminated; the mileposts, however,
on these roads marked the distances, not from the miliarium aureum, but
from the gates of the city. Pliny (N.H. iii 66) mentions it as the
starting-point in the survey of Rome under Vespasian: mensura currente
a miliario in capite Romani Fori statuto.
salutavit: at the emperor's morning reception or levée (salutatio); see
on Vesp. 4, 4.
osculo exceptus: cf. Tib. 10, 2, paucos .. in digressu exosculatus: Ner.
37, 3, neque adveniens neque proficiscens quemquam osculo impertiit, ac
ne resalutatione quidem. The amici principis of the first order, and
senators as the emperor's peers received the honour of the imperial kiss;
cf. Plin. Pan. 23 (on Trajan's entry into Rome as emperor), gratum erat
cunctis, quod senatum osculo exciperes, ut dimissus osculo fueras; Pliny
also praises Trajan for not requiring his fellow-citizens to kiss his feet
and for not returning their kiss with his hand: ib. 24, non tu civium
amplexus ad pedes tuos deprimis nec osculum manu reddis. Caligula,
according to Dio lix 27 (cf. Sen. Ben. ii 12), kissed very few; to most,
even to senators, he gave his hand or foot to kiss. Nero showed his
animosity against the senate by refusing to kiss them when he set out for
Greece and on his return from his tour (Ner. 37, 3, quoted above).
Agricola on his return from Britain visited Domitian and was greeted
with a hasty kiss, but the emperor held no converse with him (Tac. Agr. 40,
exceptus brevi osculo et nullo sermone). The custom of the imperial kiss,
which was probably introduced from the East, is discussed at length by
Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 95 sq.; see also Marquardt, Privatl.2 260.
sacrificanti interfuit: this use of interesse c. dat. pers. (= adesse) is
very remarkable; the normal expression would be sacrificio eius interfuit;
there does not seem to be any parallel passage (Freund, De Suet. genere
dicendi, cites Sen. Prov. i 1, cum probaremus interesse nobis Deum, which
is quite different). Ernesti conjectured superfuit, for which see on Tit. 1.
This sacrifice and the soothsayer's warnings of the danger threatening
Galba are mentioned in Galb. 19, 1. Otho was the only senator present
at the sacrifice; cf. Dio lxiv 5, οὕτως ὑπ' αὐτοῦ (i.e. Galba) ἐτιμᾶτο ὥστε καὶ
ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ, ἐν ᾗ ἀπέθανε, θυομένῳ αὐτῷ μόνος τῶν βουλευτῶν παρέστη.
liberto nuntiante: this freedman was Onomastus; Tac. H. і 27,
nec multo post libertus Onomastus nuntiat exspectari eum ab architecto et
redemptoribus (“contractors'"); quae significatio coeuntium iam militum
et paratae coniurationis convenerat.
•
quasi venalem domum inspecturus: Tac. (l.c.), Otho causam digressus
requirentibus cum emi sibi praedia (“country-house") vetustate suspecta
eoque prius exploranda finxisset, innixus liberto per Tiberianam domum
in Velabrum, inde ad miliarium aureum pergit. So too Plutarch (Galb.
24) says that Otho's pretext was that he had bought an old house and
wanted to point out to the vendors any defects (τὰ ὕποπτα δεῖξαι τοῖς
πωληταῖς). Under Roman law such defects had to be pointed out before
the contract was actually made, for after that time the thing bought was
at the buyer's risk (Hardy on Plut. l.c.).
postica parte Palati: = per Tiberianam domum (Tac.); διὰ τῆς Τιβερίου
καλουμένης οἰκίας (Plut.). The domus Tiberiana (see Vitell. 15, 3) near
the N.W. corner of the Palatine hill was at the back of the palace of
Augustus (domus Augustana) and connected with it. It looked down on
the Velabrum. From the Velabrum Otho entered the Forum through the
vicus Tuscus.
ad constitutum: the appointed place of meeting, viz. the miliarium
aureum in the Forum. "constitutum'' is often used as a subst. for an
appointed time and place of meeting, a tryst: e.g. Varr. R.R. ii 5, 1, qui
tum sero venisset ad constitutum: Cic. Caecin. 33, qui ad constitutum
experiundi iuris gratia venissent: Cic. Att. xii 1, 1, v Kalend, igitur ad
constitutum ("on the 26th, then, to our tryst'').
febrem simulasse: this feigned illness is implied in the account of
Tacitus (H. i 27), who says that Otho leant on a freedman (innixus liberto)
when leaving the palace (cf. id. Ann. ii 29, Libo aegritudine fessus seu
simulato morbo innisus fratri). Suetonius, on the other hand, says that
Otho rushed (proripuit se) from the Palace.
§3. abditus: "hidden away in" the closed sedan; cf. Vitell. 16,
abstrusus gestatoria sella. For the abl. with abdere see on Vitell. 7, 2.
muliebri sella: this was probably a cathedra, a sedan-chair fashioned
like the cathedra or chair ordinarily used by women (Marquardt, Privatl.”
726, 737), and differing in shape from the usual sedan-chair (sella gestatoria,
for which see Vitell. 16, and Dom. 2, 1, where it is distinguished from the
lectica). The cathedra is mentioned in Juv. i 65, cum iam sexta cervice
feratur | hinc atque inde patens ac nuda paene cathedra. These sedanchairs were roofed over and the openings at the side could be shut close
with curtains; cf. Juv. i 124, ostendens vacuam et clausam pro coniuge
sellam: Mart. xi 98, 11, lectica nec te tuta pelle veloque, | nec vindicabit
sella saepius clausa. Modest women had the sedan-chair closed; cf. Sen.
de Remed. 16, 7: Ben. i 9.
lecticariis: lecticarii (φορειαφόροι Plut.) was the general term for bearers
of either the lectica or sella. Sidonius (Ep. i 11, 9) has cathedrarii for
the bearers of the cathedra.
laxato calceo: the calcei were fastened with leather straps (corrigiae,
lora); see Marquardt, op. cit. 590: Daremberg-Saglio, i 816.
succollatus: "taken up on their shoulders.” succollare is first used
in Varr. R.R. iii 16, 8, of bees carrying the king-bee: apes fessum (regem)
sublevant, et si nequit volare, succollant (in Verg. G. iv 217 this is expressed by regem attollunt umeris). It was the regular word for the
lecticarii taking on their shoulders the poles (asseres) of the lectica; e.g.
Suet. Claud. 10, 2, ab his (militibus) lecticae impositus est et, quia sui
diffugerant, vicissim succollantibus in castra delatus est (cf. Catull. 10, 21,
fractum qui veteris pedem grabati | in collo sibi collocare posset).
The account given here by Suetonius differs in details from that in
Plutarch and Tacitus. According to Plut., Galb. 25, when Otho reached
the miliarium aureum in the Forum, he was saluted as emperor by 23
soldiers. Frightened at the fewness of his supporters he began to waver,
but these soldiers would not let him recede; they drew their swords and
surrounding his litter ordered the bearers to proceed, while Otho kept
ejaculating that he was ruined and urged the bearers to make haste.
Tacitus (H. i 27) says: Ibi tres et viginti speculatores consalutatum imperatorem ac paucitate salutantium trepidum et sellae festinanter impositum
strictis mucronibus rapiunt.
imperator consalutatus: cf. Galb. 10, 1.
principia: see on Oth. 1, 2. Plutarch (l.c.) describes how on Otho's
arrival at the camp the tribune on duty, Martialis, in the confusion of
the moment opened the gate, and then there was no more opposition, for
those who were ignorant of the plot, finding themselves in the midst of its
supporters, at once came over; so too Tac. (c. 28): stationem in castris
agebat Iulius Martialis tribunus; is magnitudine subiti sceleris, an corrupta
latius castra, et, si contra tenderet, exitium metuens, praebuit plerisque
suspicionem conscientiae. Anteposuere ceteri quoque tribuni centurionesque
praesentia dubiis et honestis, isque habitus animorum fuit, ut pessimum
facinus auderent pauci, plures vellent, omnes paterentur.
obvio quoque adhaerente: Plutarch says that while Otho was being
borne through the Forum, his 23 original supporters were increased by 23
more, and that on the way from the Forum to the camp others kept joining
by threes and fours at a time. Tacitus merely states that the original 23
were joined by about the same number on the way to the camp: totidem
fere milites in itinere adgregantur, alii conscientia, plerique miraculo
("curiosity"), pars clamore et caudiis, pars silentio, animum ex eventu
sumpturi.
1
1
:
missis qui
trucidarent: for the slaughter of Galba by the "equites,
quibus mandata caedes erat" see Galb. 19, 2. Piso, after temporarily
effecting an escape to the temple of Vesta, was dragged out and slain by
Otho's emissaries: Tac. H. i 43, advenere missu Othonis nominatim in
caedem eius ardentes Sulpicius Florus e Britannicis cohortibus, nuper a
Galba civitate donatus, et Statius Murcus speculator, a quibus protractus
Piso in foribus templi trucidatur.
pro contione: see on Vesp. 7, 3 for this use of pro. Tacitus (c. 36)
says that Otho delivered his speech to the soldiers "pro vallo castrorum.”
id. reliquissent: there is nothing corresponding to these words in
the elaborate speech which Tacitus (cc. 37, 38) puts into the mouth of
Otho, a speech consisting of a denunciation of the cruelty and meanness
of Galba, and an appeal to the soldiers to champion the rights of the
people and the senate. Dio (lxiv 5), like Suetonius, attributes to Otho
no long discourse; he simply says that Otho persuaded or rather bought
the soldiers (προσαναπείσας, μᾶλλον δὲ ἐκπριάμενος). Macé, op. cit. p. 206,
suggests that Suetonius here is indirectly criticizing Tacitus: “En racontant
vivement ces événements rapides, Suétone, qui n'embellit point la réalité,
ne fait prononcer à Othon qu'une phrase fort courte: 'J'aurai ce que
vous me laissez!' dit-il aux soldats. Et le biographe ajoute: 'Il ne leur
fit point de plus longue harangue, ni plus de promesses, ni plus de protestations. Cette allusion ne serait-elle point une critique discrètement
adressée par le modeste biographe à l'éloquent historien?" There can be
little doubt that Fabia (Sources de Tacite p. 140) is right in saying "Tacite
a fabriqué le beau discours d'Othon de toutes pièces.”
=
demum: solum, tantum, a post-Aug. use of the word; cf. Aug. 16, 3,
uno demum navigio aegerrime effugit: Val. Max. viii 14, 6, id enim demum
ornamenti familiae consulatibus et sacerdotiis et triumphis celeberrimae
deerat: Quintil. xi 3, 68, adeo suis demum oculis credidit: i 4, 29, quaedam
verba tertiae demum personae figura dicuntur, ut licet, piget: Traian. ad
Plin. Εp. x 22, nobis autem utilitas demum spectanda est. See also on
Vitell. 14, 5.
CHAPTER 7.
vergente iam die: in post-Aug. writers vergere is used of time; e.g.
Тас. А. іі 43, nam suam aetatem vergere ("was declining''), Drusi nondum
satis adolevisse: xi 4, vergente autumno: xii 44, vergentibus iam annis
suis: xiii 38, vergente iam die: Curt. iv 7, 9, nox vergit ad lucem. This
is the only place where Suetonius uses the verb.
ingressus senatum: the meeting of the servile senate to heap honours
on Otho, while the bodies of the dead still lay in the Forum, is mentioned
in Tac. H. i 47 as the crowning horror of that awful day: Exacto per
scelera die novissimum malorum fuit laetitia. Vocat senatum praetor
urbanus; certant adulationibus ceteri magistratus. Adcurrunt patres;
decernitur Othoni tribunicia potestas et nomen Augusti et omnes principum
honores, adnitentibus cunctis abotere convicia et probra, quae promisce iacta
haesisse animo eius nemo sensit: omisisset offensas an distulisset, brevitate
imperii in incerto fuit. Cf. Plut. Galb. 28, Εὐθὺς δὲ βουλὴ συνεκαλεῖτο. Καὶ
καθάπερ ἄλλοι γεγονότες ἢ θεῶν ἄλλων γεγονότων συνελθόντες ὤμνυον ὅρκον ὑπὲρ τοῦ
Οθωνος, ὃν αὐτὸς ὀμόσας οὐκ ἐτήρησε, κ.τ.λ.
The senate was convened by the
praeter urbanus, as both consuls, Galba and Vinius, were dead.
positaque brevi ratione: ratione is a correction by Erasmus of oratione.
Elsewhere ponere rationem is used in the literal sense of making a reckoning or furnishing an account; e.g. Digest xlvi 3, 89, ratione posita eius
pecuniae: xlvii 4, 1, ponere rationem actus quem servus administravit :
Sen. Ep. 87, cum ad patrimonium ventum est, diligentissimi computatores
sic rationem ponitis singulorum quibus aut pecuniam credituri estis aut
beneficia (= rationem initis facultatum eorum quibus "you make calculations concerning'"). This reading is accepted by Roth and Preud 'homme,
but not by Ihm. Oudendorp preferred propositaque
ratione. Ernesti
tried to defend ponere orationem as equivalent to habere orationem.
Burman proposed expositoque brevi oratione, explaining exposito as an
abl. abs. like cognito, intellecto, perspecto, etc., while the clause with quasi
gives the gist of the speech. Similarly Walther suggested positoque
oratione, citing Cic. Orat. 4, positum sit in primis
sine philosophia non
posse effici eloquentem: id. Cael. 7, posuistis enim coniurationis hunc
participem fuisse: id. Verr. ii 38, tantum verbo posuit. There is not,
however, any instance in Suet. of such a use of the abl. abs. Bentley
wildly conjectured perfunctusque or professusque brevi oratione. Erasmus'
correction is strongly supported by Spart. Sev. 7, where Septimius Severus
tries to justify to the senate his seizing the imperial power: in curia reddidit rationem suscepti imperii causatusque est, quod ad se occidendum
Iulianus notos ducum caedibus misisset.
..
quasi
coactus: Otho's defence, that he had acted under compulsion of the soldiers and that he had endangered his life by trying to
oppose their wishes, is mentioned in Dio lxiv 8, βεβιάσθαι μὲν γάρ, καὶ ἐς τὸ
τεῖχος (murum castrorum) ἄκων ἐσῆχθαι, κἀνταῦθα ἀντιλέγων κεκινδυνευκέναι ἔλεγε.
raptus: Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 791 n. 6) notices that from the practice
of the soldiers hurrying away the newly acclaimed emperor in a lectica
or sella to the camp (Suet. Claud. 10, Ner. 8; Tac. A. xii 69, H. і 27)
the verb rapi came to be used by metonymy for the elevation to the throne;
e.g. Capitolin. Max. et Balb. 3, qui statim raptus est et novo genere senatus
consulti, cum eodem die senatus consultum factum esset, inductus in curiam
Caesar est appellatus.
Palatium petit: Tac. H. i 47, Otho cruento adhuc foro per stragem
iacentium in Capitolium atque inde in Palatium vectus. For the Palatium
or domus Palatina see on Vesp. 25.
petit is perf. (= petiit), as in Vitell.
2,5; 16; Vesp. 24; Tit. 10, 1.
Ihm and Preud'homme read petit in
18 passages, petiit only once (Calig. 14, 3).
=
super: praeter; see on Vesp. 24.
appellatus Nero: cf. Plut. Oth. 3, τοῖς δὲ πολλοῖς χαριζόμενος οὐκ ἔφευγε
τὸ πρῶτον ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις Νέρων προσαγορεύεσθαι: Dio lxiv 8, τὸ γοῦν ὄνομα αὐτοῦ
(i.e. Nero) αὑτῷ εὐθὺς ἐπέθετο: Tac. H. i 78, Creditus est etiam de celebranda
Neronis memoria agitavisse spe volgum alliciendi. Et fuere qui imagines
Neronis proponerent; atque etiam Othoni quibusdam diebus populus et
miles, tanquam nobilitatem et decus adstruerent, Neroni Othoni acclamavit
(greeted him with shouts of "Nero Otho"). Ipse in suspenso tenuit
(i.e. he left it undecided whether he would accept the title) vetandi metu
vel agnoscendi pudore. The populace in their first exultation at Nero 's
death put on caps of freedom (Ner. 57, 1, tantum gaudium publice praebuit
ut plebs pilleata tota urbe discurreret), but they soon longed for a revival
of his lavish expenditure on food and spectacles provided for their entertainment.
nullum indicium recusantis dedit: a favourite form of expression
with Suetonius; cf. Claud. 43, signa quaedam nec obscura paenitentis
dederat: Calig. 12, 2, suspicionem retinentis dabat: Ner. 40, 4, ut
gaudentis etiam suspicionem praeberet: Iul. 2, non sine rumore prostratae
pudicitiae.
ut quidam tradiderunt: Plutarch (Oth. 3) cites Cluvius Rufus as
authority for the statement that the name of Nero was added to that of
Otho on the imperial passports sent to Spain for use in the postal service:
Κλούβιος δὲ ῾Ροῦφος εἰς ᾿Ιβηρίαν φησὶ κομισθῆναι διπλώματα, οἷς ἐκπέμπουσι τοὺς γραμματηφόρους, τὸ τοῦ Νέρωνος θετὸν ὄνομα προσγεγραμμένον ἔχοντα τῷ τοῦ ῎Οθωνος.
Plutarch adds that Otho discontinued this when he observed the irritation
it caused to the aristocracy. The historian Cluvius Rufus was already
an ex-consul at the time of Caligula's death (41 A.D.); he accompanied
Nero on his musical tour in Greece (Ner. 21); Galba appointed him as his
successor in the governorship of Hispania Tarraconensis (Tac. H. і 8),
and he retained this post under Vitellius (H. ii '65). He is described as
“perinde dives et eloquentia clarus'” (H. iv 43). As a historian he wrote
on the reigns of Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius (cf. Tac. A. xiii 20,
xiv 2). See also Introd. c. iii.
diplomatibus: a diploma (δίπλωμα) consisted of two folding tablets;
such tablets were used to convey official authorisations and answered to
our permits and passports. They were issued to couriers carrying public
despatches, and also to those who were given the privilege of using the
State means of conveyance, the cursus publicus established by Augustus.
They were granted by the emperor or a provincial governor, and the holder
was entitled to have his journey expedited in every way by the provision
of fresh horses, etc.; cf. Tac. H. ii 54 where the diplomata Othonis are
mentioned as ensuring rapid travelling. Such diplomata were inscribed
with the name of the reigning emperor, the name of the authorised person,
and the period for which they were available: they became invalid on the
emperor's death. For a full description and illustrations of these and
of military diplomata (conferring such rights as civitas and connubium
on time-expired soldiers) see the articles by Thédenat in Daremberg-Saglio ii 266 sqq., and by Purser in Smith's Dict. Ant. i3 641 sqq.; cf.
also Marquardt Staatsv. i² 561.
provinciarum praesides: see on Vesp. 6, 4.
imagines reponi passus est: cf. Plut. Oth. 3, καί τινων εἰκόνας
Νέρωνος εἰς τοὐμφανὲς προθεμένων οὐκ ἐκώλυσε: Tac. H. i 78, et fuere qui
imagines Neronis proponerent. The statues of hated emperors were overthrown after their death; cf. Dom. 23, 1, and the instances given by
Friedlaender, Sitteng. iii¹º 59.
procuratores atque libertos
revocavit: we are not told who these
were or when they were deprived of their positions by Galba. In Galb. 20,
2 Patrobius, a freedman of Nero, is mentioned as having been executed
by Galba. Dio (lxiv 8) says that Otho was intimate with Nero's infamous
freedman Sporus, and that he frightened the people by making use of
the other favourites of that emperor. Tacitus (H. i 76) states that
Crescens, a freedman of Nero, ingratiated himself with Otho by giving a
banquet to the people of Africa in honour of Otho's accession. Most of
the notorious freedmen of Nero, such as Polyclitus, Doryphorus, and
Helius, were already dead, but Epaphroditus, Nero's a libellis (“receiver
of petitions''), was also a libellis to Domitian (see Dom. 14, 4); it is
not known whether he was reappointed under Otho and continued in office
down to Domitian's reign.
subscripsit: Otho signed the order authorising the (procurator) a
rationibus, or chief controller of the fiscus, to pay the amount. The fiscus
was the emperor's own treasury; see on Vesp. 16, 3. The cost of building
palaces was defrayed from it (Stat. Silv. iii 3, 103; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³
950, 1003). The emperor's signature to official documents is mentioned
also in Ner. 10, 2, cum de supplicio cuiusdam capite damnati, ut ex more
subscriberet, admoneretur: Calig. 29, 2, numerum puniendorum subscribens.
quingenties sestertium:
quingenties centena milia sestertium,
50,000,000 sesterces, about £425,000.
=
Auream Domum: for the first of his two palaces, the Domus Transitoria
or House of Passage (so called as connecting the Palatine with the
Esquiline), Nero took the whole of the Palatine, the Velia, the valley
of the Colosseum, the S.-E. portion of the Esquiline, including the gardens
of Maecenas, and up to the Servian agger. This palace was destroyed in
the great fire of 64 A.D., and he then began the even more wildly extravagant
Aurea Domus with a vestibule big enough to contain his colossal statue,
120 ft. high (see on Vesp. 18), and with a triple colonnade a mile long.
All the parts of the palace were overlaid with gold and adorned with gems
and mother-of-pearl. He dedicated it, though not finished, and said that
he was at last beginning to be housed like a human being (Ner. 31, 2,
hactenus comprobavit, ut se diceret quasi hominem tandem habitare
coepisse). Though Otho continued the building during his brief reign, it
was never completed. Vespasian stopped the work and restored the ground
to the public, confining the limits of the imperial residence to the Palatine
itself.
..
§ 2. dicitur obmurmurasse: the construction of this sentence is twofold: first dicitur is used personally with the nom. and inf. (pave factus
edidisse), but later we have the acc. and inf. (prolapsum obmurmurasse)
depending on dicitur in an impersonal sense. In c. 12 infr. there is the
same variation with traditur followed by fuisse scambus and later by linere
consuetum. Similar mixed constructions are found in Cic., Liv., etc.;
e.g. Cic. de or. ii 299, ad Themistoclem quidam doctus homo accessisse
dicitur eique artem memoriae pollicitus esse se traditurum; cum ille quaesisset, quidnam illa ars efficere posset, dixisse illum doctorem, ut omnia
meminisset, etc.; Liv. v 41, M. Papirius dicitur Gallo barbam suam permulcenti scipione eburno in caput incusso iram movisse; atque ab eo
initium caedis ortum, ceteros in sedibus suis trucidatos. See KühnerStegmann, i 710.
per quietem:
=
per somnum; cf. Vesp. 7,2; 25.
pavefactus: cf. the troubled dreams of Caligula, Calig. 50, 3, neque
enim plus quam tribus nocturnis horis quiescebat ac ne iis quidem placida
quiete, sed pavida miris rerum imaginibus. Nero's sleep was broken by
frightful visions after he had murdered his mother Agrippina and his
wife Octavia (Ner. 46).
repertus humi: Dio lxiv 7, καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο τῆς νυκτὸς οὕτω δή τι ἐν
τοῖς ὕπνοις ἐταράχθη, ὥστε καὶ ἐκ τῆς εὐνῆς ἐκπεσεῖν, τοὺς δὲ προκοιτοῦντας (ante
cubiculum excubantes) ἐκπλῆξαι. ἐσπηδήσαντες οὖν εὗρον αὐτὸν χαμαὶ κείμενον.
Manes propitiare: the Manes of one whose death was due to outrage did not rest till the guilty paid the penalty or made fitting atonement;
cf. Liv. iii 58, manes Verginiae
per tot domos ad petendas poenas
vagati nullo relicto sonte tandem quieverunt. When the survivor of the
three Horatii, after vanquishing the three Curiatii, slew his sister Horatia
for bewailing their death, though he was acquitted by the people as having
slain her justly, yet his father had to offer expiatory sacrifices (“piacularia
sacrificia") for the bloodshed, and these sacrifices were continued every
year by the Horatian family to the Manes of Horatia (Liv. i 26, Тас. А.
xii 8). Agrippina invokes against Nero the shades of the Silani whom he
had murdered (Tac. A. xiii 14, infernos Silanorum manes invocare). There
is a remarkable story in Apul. Met. viii 9 sqq. of the vengeance exacted
by a wife, in obedience to the Manes of her murdered husband, from a
would-be lover of hers who had been his murderer.
postridie: Dio (l.c.) says that it was after his unsuccessful sacrifice
on the first day.
prolapsum: a most unlucky omen; cf. Iul. 59, cum immolanti aufugisset hostia, profectionem adversus Scipionem et Iubam non distulit.
Prolapsus (πεσὼν ἐπὶ στόμα, Dio xlii 58) etiam in egressu navis verso ad
melius omine: “Teneo te,” inquit, ‘“Africa.” The Crassi, father and son,
both fell at the doors of the temple of Astarte at Hierapolis in Syria, an
omen of the disaster they were to meet with at Carrhae (Plut. Crass. 17).
obmurmurasse: in the few other passages where this compound is
found it means to murmur or mutter against; e.g. Ov. Her. xviii 47 (Leander
complaining of Boreas), Vana peto; precibusque meis obmurmurat ipse:
Frontin. Strat. iv 6, 2 (of the mutterings of soldiers against their general),
cum unus ex eis obmurmurando diceret. In our passage the ob- seems to
have little force, though it may be intensive as in obverberare, etc. Roby
(Lat. Gram. ii p. 415) gives a list of compound verbs in which ob- is
"almost pleonastic.”
Τί γάρ μοι καὶ μακροῖς αὐλοῖς;: SC. κοινόν ἐστι, ‘“What have I to do
with long pipes?” Dio (lxiv 7) gives the words in a slightly different form:
θύοντί τε γὰρ αὐτῷ τὴν θυσίαν τὴν πρώτην τὰ ἱερὰ πονηρὰ ὤφθη, ὥστ᾽ αὐτὸν
μεταγνόντα ἐπὶ τοῖς πεπραγμένοις εἰπεῖν “τί γάρ με ἔδει μακροῖς αὐλοῖς αὐλεῖν;” ἔστι
δὲ τοῦτο δημῶδες, ἐς παροιμίαν φέρον, ἐπὶ τῶν ἔξω τι τοῦ προσφόρου σφισι ποιούντων.
The expression which Dio thus describes as proverbially used of unfitting
and unprofitable effort is not found elsewhere; the meaning as applied to
Otho would be that given by Torrentius, "Non omnibus buccis longas
tibias, quae difficilius inflentur quo longiores sint, pariter convenire, ut
neque Othoni imperium.” Burman cites as parallel the lines of Soph.
(frag. 701, Nauck) which Cicero (Att. ii 16) applies to Pompey: φυσᾷ γὰρ
οὐ σμικροῖσιν αὐλίσκοις ἔτι, | ἀλλ' ἀγρίαις φύσαισι, φορβειᾶς ἄτερ ‘“He blows no
more upon a tiny pipe, But with a fierce unmodulated blast." Were it
not for the statement of Dio, it would be easy with some of the early
commentators to take Otho's words as meaning "What use is there in my
trying to sacrifice or to make atonement?'"; long pipes being used especially
in connexion with sacrifices (see Daremberg-Saglio, v 304). Cedrenus (11
cent.) differs from other authors in stating (p. 216 C) that the words were
the dying words of Otho: θύων δέ ποτε ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τὰ τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης ᾄσματα τοῖς
ἱεροῖς παρέμιξε· καὶ διὰ τοῦτο, Οὐιτελίου (Vitellius) αὐτῷ ἐπαναστάντος, ξιφιδίῳ
ἑαυτὸν διεχρήσατο, εἰπών “ Τί γάρ με ἔδει μακροῖς αὐλοῖς ἄδειν καὶ αὐλεῖν;”
CHAPTER 8.
sub idem tempus: on January 1, 69 A.D., the oath of fealty to Galba
was taken by the army of Lower Germany; but in Upper Germany the 4th
and 22nd legions took the oath to the senate and people of Rome. News
of this was brought to Vitellius at Cologne and he communicated it to the
officers of the army of Lower Germany of which he was legatus. On
January 3 Vitellius was proclaimed emperor by the troops of both armies
(Vitell. 8, Tac. H. i 52 sqq.). Galba was deliberating about the adoption
of a son and successor when the revolt occurred; cf. Plut. Galb. 22,
καταλαμβάνει δ' αὐτὸν ἔτι μέλλοντα καὶ βουλευόμενον ἐκραγέντα τὰ Γερμανικά.
When the tidings reached him, he proceeded at once to adopt Piso on
January 10 (Suet. Galb. 17, Oth. 5, 1; Plut. Galb. 23). On January 15
Galba and Piso were slain, and Otho was made emperor.
Germaniciani: for this adj. see on Vesp. 6, 2. The legions composing
the armies in Upper and Lower Germany are mentioned in the notes on
Galb. 16, 2 and Vitell. 8, 1.
in. verba iurarant: the usual expression for swearing allegiance;
see on Galb. 11.
Vitelli: Vitellius was appointed by Galba to the command in Lower
Germany (Vitell. 7, Tac. H. i 9). He arrived there about December 1,
68 A.D.; so that he had been just a month in command when both armies
declared him emperor.
auctor senatui fuit: see on Vesp. 11, auctor senatui fuit decernendi.
mittendae legationis: Galba had already sent envoys to the mutinous
German armies on the occasion of his adoption of Piso, but these envoys
were recalled by Otho who sent others to replace them; cf. Tac. H. i 74,
Otho, revocatis quos Galba miserat legatis, rursus ad utrumque Germanicum
exercitum et ad legionem Italicam easque, quae Lugduni agebant, copias
specie senatus (“nominally from the senate'') misit. Legati apud Vitellium
remansere promptius quam ut retenti viderentur; praetoriani, quos per
simulationem officii legatis Otho adiunxerat, remissi, antequam legionibus
miscerentur.
per internuntios ac litteras optulit: Tac. (l.c.), Crebrae interim et
muliebribus blandimentis infectae ab Othone ad Vitellium epistulae offerebant pecuniam et gratiam et quemcumque quietis locum prodigae vitae
legisset. Plutarch (Oth. 4) says that when Otho's confidence was restored
by the receipt of friendly despatches from Mucianus and Vespasian, who
were in command of large forces in Syria and Judaea, he wrote to
Vitellius advising him to remember his position as a soldier (παραινῶν
στρατιωτικὰ φρονεῖν) and offering him large sums of money and a city
where he could live in luxurious ease. Vitellius at first replied in a hypocritical strain, but soon both he and Otho grew heated and wrote in most
abusive terms, charging each other with disgraceful vices of which they
were both equally guilty according to Plutarch and Tacitus.
consortem imperii: Otho's offer to share the empire with Vitellius is
mentioned also in Dio lxiv 10: ὁ δὲ Ὄθων, ἐπειδὴ καὶ μὴ ἔπειθε τὸν Οὐιτέλλιον,
ἐς κοινωνίαν αὐτὸν τῆς ἀρχῆς πολλάκις παρακαλῶν, εἰς πόλεμον λοιπὸν φανερὸν
καθίστατο. For the position of the consors imperii in relation to the
princeps see on Tit. 9, 3.
generumque: Suetonius alone states that Otho proposed to become
the son-in-law of Vitellius. The daughter of Vitellius is mentioned in
Vitell. 6; for her marriage to D. Valerius Asiaticus and her subsequent
marriage in Vespasian's reign see on Vesp. 14, 1.
copiis quas Vitellius praemiserat: Vitellius, having been proclaimed
emperor by the armies in Germany, was joined by various commanders in
Gaul and by the troops in Britain. He sent Fabius Valens and Aulus
Caecina in advance with two forces to invade Italy by different routes;
see Vitell. 9 and the notes there.
paene internecione: Tacitus (H. i 80) says that this outbreak of the
praetorians nearly brought about the destruction of the whole city: Parvo
initio, unde nihil timebatur, orta seditio prope urbi excidio fuit.
amplissimi ordinis: = senatorii ordinis; see on Vesp. 2, 3.
§ 2. placuerat per classiarios arma transferri remittique navibus: a
most obscure passage, and it is possible that some words have been lost,
since in all the better MSS. et is found before placuerat, though it has
been generally deleted by editors as being due merely to the preceding est.
Lipsius suggested etenim for et, Oudendorp Ostiam, Bücheler ei. The
military riot which Suetonius mentions is described by Tacitus (H. i 80)
and Plutarch (Oth. 3), but it is very difficult to reconcile the three accounts.
The account given by Tac. is as follows:-Septumam decumam cohortem
e colonia Ostiensi in urbem acciri Otho iusserat; armandae eius cura Vario
Crispino tribuno e praetorianis data. Is quo magis vacuus quietis castris
iussa exequeretur, vehicula cohortis incipiente nocte onerari aperto armamentario iubet. Tempus in suspicionem, causa in crimen, adfectatio quietis
in tumultum evaluit, et visa inter temulentos arma cupidinem sui movere.
Fremit miles et tribunos centurionesque 'proditionis arguit, tamquam
familiae senatorum ad perniciem Othonis armarentur, pars ignari et vino
graves, pessimus quisque in occasionem praedarum, volgus, ut mos est,
cuiuscumque motus novi cupidum; et obsequia meliorum nox abstulerat.
Resistentem seditioni tribunum et severissimos centurionum obtruncant,
rapta arma, nudati gladii, insidentes equis urbem ac Palatium petunt.
Plutarch says: Κρισπῖνον δὲ πέμψαντος αὐτοῦ τὴν ἑπτακαιδεκάτην σπεῖραν
Ωστίας ἀπάξοντα, κἀκείνου νυκτός ἔτι συσκευαζομένου καὶ τὰ ὅπλα ταῖς ἁμάξαις
ἐπιτιθέντος, οἱ θρασύτατοι πάντες ἐβόων οὐδὲν ὑγιὲς τὸν Κρισπῖνον ἥκειν διανοούμενον, ἀλλὰ τὴν σύγκλητον (senatum) ἐπιχειρεῖν πράγμασι νεωτέροις καὶ τὰ
ὅπλα κατὰ Καίσαρος, οὐ Καίσαρι παρακομίζεσθαι. Τοῦ δὲ λόγου πολλῶν ἁπτομένου
καὶ παροξύνοντος οἱ μὲν ἐπελαμβάνοντο τῶν ἁμαξῶν, οἱ δὲ τοὺς ἐνισταμένους
ἑκατοντάρχας δύο καὶ τὸν Κρισπῖνον αὐτὸν ἀπέκτειναν, πάντες δὲ διασκευασάμενοι καὶ παρακαλέσαντες ἀλλήλους Καίσαρι βοηθεῖν ἤλαυνον εἰς τὴν ῾Ῥώμην.
From Plutarch's account it appears that Crispinus had been sent to Ostia
to bring the 17th cohort to Rome; that the disturbance began in the camp at
Ostia; and that the rioters rode from Ostia to Rome. It is not clear whether
Tac. means that the mutiny began at Ostia, and that the mutineers on
their arrival at Rome were joined by the praetorians, or that the outbreak
occurred in the praetorian camp outside the gates of Rome, from which the
praetorians rode into the city to the Palace. Most probably Tac. is in
agreement with Suet. that the mutiny took place in the praetorian camp,
and that the mutineers were praetorians. Hardy (on Plut. l.c.) understands
Tac. to mean that the 17th cohort had already arrived in the city, having
been brought from Ostia to be converted into a praetorian cohort, and
that while Crispinus was taking the arms for its equipment out of the
armoury in the praetorian camp, the praetorians, suspecting some treachery,
mutinied. Hardy accepts Mommsen's view that this 17th cohort, stationed
at Ostia, was one of the cohortes urbanae, while others hold that it was
one of the cohortes civium Romanorum or that it consisted of marines
(classiarii); see note on Vesp. 8, 3. The account given by Suet. here of
the cause of the disorder is so condensed as to be almost unintelligible.
The best explanation of his words is that given by Krauss (De vitarum
imperatoris Othonis fide quaestiones, p. 27): “Ut septima decima cohors
classiariorum Ostiae collocata iustis ad bellum armis instrueretur, classiarii
cum vehiculis in castra praetoriana, ubi armamentarium publicum erat,
praemissi et inde arma vehiculis imposita ad Tiberim transportare impositaque navibus Ostiam transferre iussi erant. Vocabulum "Remittere"
significare videtur, armamentarium praetorianorum omnibus cohortibus circa
Romam tendentibus commune fuisse illamque cohortem, ut in pace, arma
sua habuisse in illo deposita et reservata, unde bello exorto cohortibus
singulis reddebantur.” Hofstee infers from Tac. H. ii 63 that the 17th
cohort returned to Ostia from Rome during Otho's reign, and thinks that
Suet. is describing the trouble as happening in the praetorian camp at
the time when the arms were being taken out to be sent back to Ostia
on the cohort's return. Both Tac. and Plut., however, definitely connect
the disorder with the bringing of the cohort from Ostia to Rome, and not
with its return.
remitti: Stephanus suggested praemitti, which is approved of by
Burman and Ernesti; Oudendorp (followed by Wolf and Bremi)
demitti (= secundo flumine devehi Ostiam).
castris: the praetorian camp; for its origin and situation see on
Galb. 19, 1.
promerentur: i.e. given out of the armoury (armamentarium) in the
praetorian camp which served also as a depot for the cohorts in the
neighbourhood of Rome and contained arms for every class of troops (cf.
Tac. H. i 38). By an oversight Howard and Jackson in their Index
verborum to Suetonius take promerentur here from promereor.
in Palatium: where Otho was entertaining at dinner eighty of the
senators with their wives; Plut. (l.c.), πυθόμενοι παρ' αὐτῷ δειπνεῖν ὀγδοήκοντα
συγκλητικοὺς ἐφέροντο πρὸς τὰ βασίλεια: Tac. (c. 81), erat Othoni celebre
convivium primoribus feminis virisque.
cucurrerunt: Plutarch says that the rioters rode from Ostia to Rome
(ἤλαυνον εἰς τὴν Ρώμην), a distance of 16 miles, but if the 17th cohort at
Ostia was one of the cohortes urbanae (Mommsen, Hermes xvi 645), the
difficulty is that there were no cavalry attached to the cohortes urbanae
(Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 1067); if the trouble began in the praetorian camp,
then the words of Tacitus “insidentes equis urbem ac Palatium petunt”
are to be explained by the fact that the praetorian camp lay outside the
city of Rome, and there was a squadron of 24 cavalry attached to each
praetorian cohort (Heraeus on Tac. l.c.; Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 477).
caedem senatus flagitantes: Tac. (c. 82), undique arma et minae,
modo in centuriones tribunosque, modo in senatum universum, lymphatis
caeco pavore animis, et quia neminem unum destinare irae poterant,
licentiam in omnes poscentibus: Plut. (l.c.), νῦν καιρὸν εἶναι λέγοντες ἐν
ταὐτῷ πάντας ἀνελεῖν τοὺς Καίσαρος πολεμίους.
repulsis tribunorum qui inhibere temptabant: Tac. (l.c.), volnerato
Iulio Martiale tribuno et Vitellio Saturnino praefecto legionis, dum
ruentibus obsistunt. Both Tac. and Plut. say that Otho sent out the
prefects of the praetorians to try to appease the soldiers, while the senatorial
guests made their escape from the Palace by another door.
nonnullis et occisis: neither Tac. nor Plut. mentions any officers slain
at the Palace, though some had been slain earlier at the praetorian camp.
sic ut erant cruenti: ut, sic ut (sicut), erat, etc., like the Gr. ὡς εἶχεν,
denote the state or condition in which a person or thing was when an action
took place (Kühner-Stegmann, ii 451); cf. Calig. 45, 2, sic ut erant
loricatos ad discumbendum adhortatus est: Claud. 9, 1, sic ut vestitus
advenerat : Claud. 34, 2, induxit unum (in arenam), sic ut erat togatus.
perruperunt in triclinium: Tac. (l.c.), militum impetus ne foribus
quidem Palatii coercitus, quo minus convivium inrumperent, ostendi sibi
Othonem expostulantes. Plut. says that they forced their way in, asking
what had become of the enemies of Caesar (i.e. the senators).
nec nisi viso destiterunt: Otho stood up on a couch and succeeded in
quieting them with entreaties and tears; cf. Tac. (l.c), donec Otho contra
decus imperii toro insistens precibus et lacrimis aegre cohibuit, redieruntque in castra inviti neque innocentes: Plut. (l.c.) ὀρθὸς ἀπὸ τῆς κλίνης πολλὰ
παρηγορήσας καὶ δεηθεὶς καὶ μηδὲ δακρύων φεισάμενος μόλις ἀπέπεμψεν αὐτούς. Οn
the following day the prefects harangued them and paid 5000 sesterces to
each man. Then Otho ventured to enter the camp and was surrounded by
the tribunes and centurions wishing to resign command of such mutinous
troops. The soldiers were shamed by this and returned to their duty,
even demanding the punishment of the ringleaders, two of whom were
executed.
§ 3. praepropere: Tacitus (c. 89) mentions two reasons for his
haste: aspernatus est omnem cunctationem ut Neroni quoque exitiosam; et
Caecina iam Alpes transgressus extimulabat. Bentley's praepostere is
needless.
incohavit: owing to the express testimony of the grammarian
Diomedes (Keil, i 365) that Suetonius in one of his writings defended the
form incohare against inchoare, Ihm restores incohare everywhere in the
Lives of the Caesars, though the MSS. give inchoare, which is retained
by Preud'homme.
religionum: see on c. 6, 1.
The
motis necdum conditis ancilibus: cf. Tac. (l.c.), fuere qui proficiscenti
Othoni moras religionemque nondum conditorum ancilium afferrent. The
ancilia, or sacred shields, were 12 in number, 11 being copies of the original
shield which fell from heaven on March 1 in the reign of Numa.
name ancile is for ancidile (am-caedere "to cut on both sides''), the shield
being an oval with incisions at both sides, so that it roughly resembled the
figure 8. On March 1, the opening of the campaigning season, the ancilia
were brought out (moveri, cf. κινεῖν τὰ ὅπλα) from the sacrarium Martis
(or curia Saliorum in Palatio) by the Salii, or priests of Mars, who in a
warlike dance (tripudium; hence their name Salii, a saliendo) and with
special chants (axamenta) bore them round various halting-places
(mansiones) where the ancilia were deposited for one night while the Salii
feasted, and not until the end of March were the ancilia put back (condi)
into the sacrarium Martis. There was a minor festival (Armilustrium)
on Oct. 19 (the campaigning season, in theory, ending in Oct.), when the
ancilia were again brought out and put back.
quod antiquitus infaustum habetur: it was inauspicious to make a
march “ancilibus nondum conditis,” as we see from Liv. xxxvii 33 where
Scipio is retarded by this consideration: stativa deinde ad Hellespontum
aliquamdiu habuerunt, quia dies forte, quibus ancilia moventur, religiosi
ad iter inciderant (for dies religiosi see on “religio,” Oth. 6, 1). It was
also an inauspicious time for marriage; cf. Ov. Fast. iii 393, Nubere si
qua voles, quamvis properabitis ambo, | differ; habent parvae commoda
magna morae. | Arma movent pugnam, pugna est aliena maritis. | Condita
cum fuerint, aptius omen erit.
.....
die: Otho set out on March 24 according to Suetonius, but on March
14 according to Tacitus (H. i 90). The date given by Tac. is apparently
confirmed by the Acta Fratr. Arval. for 69 A.D. (Henzen p. xciii = Dessau
Inscr. Lat. 241): pri(die) idus Martias vota nuncupata pro s[al]ute et
reditu... (Vitelli has been erased) Germanici imp(eratoris). In his
note on this Dessau says: “Pridie idus Martias, quo die Othonem ab urbe
profectum esse narrat Tac. H. i 90, pro huius sine dubio salute et reditu
vota nuncupata sunt ab Arvalibus; sed devicto Othone, cum nondum acta
huius diei perscripta essent, pro Othonis nomine, Vitellii positum; id
ipsum postea erasum. De nomine Germanico Vitellio indito cf. Tac. H. i 62,
ii 64.'"
cultores deum Matris: in 205 B.c., during the second Punic war, the
worship of the Magna Mater (Cybele) was introduced to Rome from
Pessinus in Galatia, and the festival of the Megalesia (Μεγάλη = Magna)
was held annually from April 4 to April 10. Under the emperor Claudius
(41-54 A.D.) another religious celebration was instituted to commemorate
the grief of Cybele at the loss of Attis, and her joy when he was restored.
This celebration was held from March 22 to March 27. The first day,
March 22, was the day of Arbor intrat, when the priests (Dendrophoroi)
carried a pine-tree, on which hung an image of Attis, to the temple of
Cybele on the Palatine. On March 23 there was a sounding of trumpets
(περισαλπισμός, tubilustrium). March 24 (the day on which Suet. says
Otho set out) was the day of blood (dies sanguinis) on which the chief
priest (Archigallus) gashed his arm and sprinkled the blood. March 25
was a day of rejoicing (Hilaria) for the restoration of the body of Attis
to Cybele. March 26 was a day of rest (requietio), and on March 27 the
celebration concluded with the lavatio or bathing of the image of the
goddess in the Almo where it joins the Tiber. See Marquardt, Staatsv. iii
367 sqq.; R. Ellis, Introd. to Catull. lxiii.
adversissimis auspiciis: in addition to the unfavourable auspices
which Suetonius mentions here, most alarming prodigies were reported;
cf. Tac. H. i 86, Prodigia insuper terrebant diversis auctoribus volgata:
in vestibulo Capitolii omissas habenas bigae, cui Victoria institerat;
erupisse cella Iunonis maiorem humana speciem; statuam divi Iulii in
insula Tiberini amnis sereno et immoto die ab Occidente in Orientem conversam; prolocutum in Etruria bovem, insolitos animalium partus et plura
alia rudibus saeculis etiam in pace observata, quae nunc tantum in metu
audiuntur. The omission of these prodigies by the superstitious Suetonius
is one of the proofs that he did not follow Tacitus as his authority.
Diti patri: Dis pater was the Italian equivalent of the Greek Pluto,
god of the underworld. The name is traditionally explained as di(ve)s
"rich” (cf. Πλούτων from πλοῦτος “riches''), but some philologists derive
it from the stem div (in divus, divinus, Dialis, etc.). Dis pater was a son
of Saturn and Ops, and brother of Jupiter and Neptune. His oldest
shrine at Rome was connected with the temple of Saturn at the foot of
the Capitol. The worship of Dis first comes into prominence at Rome in
249 B.C., while the issue of the first Punic war was uncertain; alarming
portents occurred, such as the destruction of part of the walls of Rome
by lightning, and the Sibylline books ordained that ludi Tarentini were
to be celebrated in honour of Dis and Proserpina in the Campus Martius
for three successive nights, and that black victims (hostiae furvae) were
to be offered, and that these ceremonies were to be renewed every hundred
years (see on the “ludi saeculares,” Dom. 4, 3). Except in this connexion
we hear little of the worship of Dis at Rome either in the state religion
or in private cults. For the offering of black cattle to the gods of the
underworld, as of white victims to the di superi, cf. Verg. Aen. vi 153,
243 sqq.; Serv. on Verg. G. ii 380.
..
victima. caesa litavit : litare (καλλιερεῖν) is probably used here of
the victim itself (= felicem esse); cf. Aug. 96, 2, sacrificio non litanti:
Mart. x 73, 6, non quacumque manu victima caesa litat. Suetonius also
has litare in the more usual sense of the sacrificer obtaining favourable
omens: Iul. 81, 4, pluribus hostiis caesis, cum litare non posset: Ner. 56,
attendit et extispicio, nec unquam litavit.
contraria exta potiora sint: this peculiarity of the litatio in the case
of sacrifices to Dis is not mentioned elsewhere, and seems a mere
generalisation from the fate of Otho. Bouché-Leclercq (in Daremberg-Saglio iii 1268), commenting on this statement of Suetonius, says: “Cette
casuistique suspecte est contraire à l'essence même du sacrifice expiatoire
ou propitiatoire, qui est la substitution de la victime à la personne menacée,
laquelle se rachète par cette rançon acceptée. A. ce compte, les nombreux
sacrifices offerts aux divinités souterraines, durant les Jeux Séculaires
(Tellus, Dis Pater, Proserpine, les Moeres) auraient dû, pour être heureux,
présenter des entrailles défavorables, ce qui est absurde.”
inundationibus Tiberis: described more fully in Tac. H. i 86, Sed
praecipuus et cum praesenti exitio etiam futuri pavor subita inundatione
Tiberis, qui immenso auctu, proruto ponte sublicio (i.e. the old wooden
U 2
bridge) ac strage obstantis molis refusus, non modo iacentia et plana urbis
loca, sed secura eiusmodi casuum implevit. Rapti e publico plerique,
plures in tabernis et cubilibus intercepti. Fames in volgus inopia quaestus
et penuria alimentorum. Corrupta stagnantibus aquis insularum ("tenement houses”) fundamenta, dein remeante flumine dilapsa. Plutarch
(Oth. 4) says that the river rose to an unprecedented height: Καὶ τὸ περὶ τὸν
Θύμβριν σύμπτωμα σημεῖον ἐποιοῦντο οἱ πολλοὶ μοχθηρόν. Ἦν μὲν γὰρ ὥρα περὶ ἦν
μάλιστα οἱ ποταμοὶ πλήθουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὔπω τοσοῦτος ἤρθη πρότερον οὐδὲ ἀπώλεσε
τοσαῦτα καὶ διέφθειρεν ὑπερχυθεὶς καὶ κατακλύσας πολὺ μέρος τῆς πόλεως, πλεῖστον δὲ
ἐν ᾧ τὸν ἐπὶ πράσει διαπωλοῦσι σῖτον (i. e. the corn-market), ὡς δεινὴν ἀπορίαν ἡμερῶν
συχνῶν κατασχεῖν. Pliny (N.H. iii 55) says that the inundations of the
Tiber were prophetic of impending dangers: quin immo vates intelligitur
potius ac monitor, auctu semper religiosus verius quam saevus. We hear
of disastrous inundations in B.c. 241, 215, 202, 193-2, 189, 54, 44 (cf. Hor.
C. i 2), 27, 23, 22. Augustus tried to protect Rome by appointing
“Curatores alvei (“bed”) Tibéris et riparum,” but the inundations still
continued, and in 15 A.D. we find the senate considering (and rejecting) a
scheme to lessen the volume of the river by diverting some of its main
tributaries, the Nar, Velinus, and Clanis (Dio lvii 14, Tac. A. i 76).
vicensimum lapidem: the 20th milestone on the Via Flaminia which
ran up the valley of the Tiber through Etruria and continued through
Umbria and over the Apennines to Ariminum (Rimini) on the Adriatic.
A station "Ad Vicesimum" on the Via Flaminia is mentioned in the
Jerusalem Itinerary and the Peutinger Table; Bunbury (Smith's Dict.
Geogr. ii 1300) says that it must have been a little beyond the Monte di
Guardia, but was evidently a mere Mutatio, or station for changing horses,
and no ruins mark the site.
praeclusam viam: cf. Tас. Н. і 86, utque primum vacuus a periculo
animus fuit, id ipsum, quod paranti expeditionem Othoni campus Martius
et via Flaminia iter belli esset obstructum, a (“without regard to'")
fortuitis vel naturalibus causis in prodigium et omen imminentium cladium
vertebatur.
CHAPTER 9.
trahi bellum oporteret: cf. Tac. H. ii 30, Otho consultavit, trahi
bellum an fortunam experiri placeret. When the armies of Valens and
Caecina, the generals of Vitellius, had effected a junction, the combined
force in their fortified camp outside Cremona was nearly 100,000 men,
and they were ready to give battle. At the council of Otho's commanders,
which Otho himself attended, Suetonius Paulinus and Marius Celsus were
strongly in favour of delay, Otho was inclined to risk a decisive battle
(pronus ad certandum), and his brother Titianus along with Proculus,
prefect of the praetorian guard, with the rashness of ignorance (imperitia
properantes) advocated this course, which was adopted with disastrous
results.
quando: see on Vesp. 16, 3. Kraffert would read quoad.
fame urgeretur hostis: one of the arguments for delay used by
Suetonius Paulinus, the most skilful of Otho's officers (nemo illa tempestate
militaris rei callidior habebatur, Tac. c. 32). He urged that the full
forces of Vitellius had already come: that no troops from Britain or
Spain could reach him: that Gaul was ready to rise, and that Vitellius
could withdraw no more men from the Rhine: that Gallia Narbonensis
had been cowed by Otho's fleet and by his land forces: that Italy
beyond the Padus was shut in by the Alps and could not be relieved by
sea and was already exhausted by the passage of the Vitellian forces who
now lacked corn and supplies: that Otho had behind him all the resources
of the state and vast reserves of money "stronger than the sword in civil
war"; and by delaying he would allow of the arrival of reinforcements
from Pannonia, Moesia, Dalmatia, and the East.
impatiens longioris sollicitudinis: this is the view of Tacitus (c. 40),
who describes how Titianus and Proculus had recourse to their rights as
commanders-in-chief (in ius imperii transeunt) to overrule Paulinus and
Celsus, and ordered the attack which was angrily demanded in a despatch
from Otho: Aderat citus equo Numida cum atrocibus mandatis, quibus
Otho increpita ducum segnitia, rem in discrimen mitti iubebat, aeger mora
et spei impatiens. So too Plutarch (Oth. 9) says on the authority of
Secundus, Otho's secretary, that Otho was no longer able to endure the
suspense; his inexperience and effeminacy made him incapable of a
rational consideration of the dangers; overburdened by his cares, he
hurried on, and, with head veiled, like a man who leaps from a precipice,
he committed the fortunes of his party to the accidents of chance: δοκεῖ
δὲ μηδὲ αὐτὸς Ὄθων ἐξαναφέρειν ἔτι πρὸς τὴν ἀδηλότητα μηδὲ ὑπομένειν ἀηθείᾳ καὶ
μαλακότητι τοὺς περὶ τῶν δεινῶν λογισμούς, ἐκπονούμενος δὲ ταῖς φροντίσι σπεύδειν
ἐγκαλυψάμενος, ὥσπερ ἀπὸ κρημνοῦ, μεθεῖναι τὰ πράγματα πρὸς τὸ συντυχόν. Both
Plut. and Tac. mention another account that the two armies, considering
neither Otho nor Vitellius worth fighting for, were inclined to come to
terms and either give the empire to one of their own generals (Paulinus
having the best chance, according to Tac.) or leave the choice to the senate.
Plut. adds that some suspect that this design was one reason why Celsus
and Paulinus advised delay, while the adherents of Otho (Proculus and
Titianus) wished for immediate action. Tac. (c. 37) rejects this version
as improbable.
ante Vitelli adventum: Vitellius had just set out from Lower
Germany bringing up the remaining strength of the army of Germany
and 8000 men levied in Britain, when news reached him of his victory at
Betriacum and the death of Otho. See Tac., c. 57.
profligari plurimum posse: "that victory could be gained to a very
large extent." The expression is peculiar, as profligari must be taken
impersonally, plurimum being adverbial (cf. Galb. 5, 2; 8, 1; Dom. 4, 2;
so "plus,” Galb. 15, 1). In all the other passages where Suetonius uses
profligare, it means "to conquer": Iul. 30, 4, Pharsalica acie caesos profligatosque adversarios prospiciens; ib. 35, 2, Mithridatis filium una acie
profligavit; Ner. 3, 1, nec nisi partibus ubique profligatis M. Antonio.
tradidit classem. Gellius (xv 5) says that profligare means “ad perniciem
deducere,” “deperdere,” and that it was often wrongly used in the sense
of "prope absolvi" "to be almost completed” (Cicero, however, uses it
in this latter sense, Tusc. v 6, 15, profligata iam haec et paene ad exitum
adducta quaestio est, and the phrase profligare bellum, “to break the back
of the war," occurs in Cic., Liv., Tac., etc.). In our passage profligari
is usually explained as prope absolvi, but the use of plurimum seems
=
fatal to this; it would be a meaningless pleonasm to say "the matter
could be almost decided to a very large extent." For the impersonal use
of the passive see on Vitell. 1, 1, variatum esset.
impar militum ardori: Plutarch includes in the reasons for Otho's
decision for immediate action the indisputable fact that the praetorian
cohorts, now coming to taste what real campaigning was, longed to return
to the luxurious life of Rome, and therefore could not be restrained in
their eagerness for a battle, for they imagined that they would sweep the
enemy at the first charge (οὐκ ἦσαν καθεκτοὶ σπεύδοντες ἐπὶ τὴν μάχην, ὡς εὐθὺς
ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς ἀναρπασόμενοι τοὺς ἐναντίους).
substitit Brixelli: Brixellum (mod. Brescello) was a town of Cisalpine
Gaul on the south side of the Padus (Po). When the council of Otho
and his commanders decided on a battle, Titianus and Proculus prevailed
on Otho to retire to Brixellum, while Paulinus and Celsus did not oppose
this for fear of being thought to expose the emperor to peril. This
mistake gave the death-blow to the party of Otho; cf. Tac. H. ii 33, Is
primus dies Othonianas partes afflixit; namque et cum ipso praetorianarum
cohortium et speculatorum (see on Galb. 18, 1) equitumque valida manus
discessit, et remanentium fractus animus, quando suspecti duces et Otho,
cui uni apud militem fides, dum et ipse non nisi militibus credit, imperia
ducum in incerto reliquerat. Similarly Plutarch (Oth. 10) characterizes
Otho's withdrawal as a blunder, not merely because it removed the respect
and emulation which his presence would have inspired, but also because he
took away with him the keenest and most efficient of the troops as his
bodyguard (ὡσπερεὶ στόμωμα τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπέκοψε). Dio (lxiv 10) says that
Otho withdrew from the battle, declaring that he could not bear to witness
a battle between kindred; just as if he himself had become emperor in
any legal fashion and not by butchering the consuls and the Caesar (i.e.
Piso) and the emperor (Galba) in Rome itself.
§ 2. apud Alpes: this victory seems to have been a very paltry affair.
Some of Otho's troops were sent up to seize the province of the Maritime
Alps and then attack Gallia Narbonensis which had declared for Vitellius.
The province of the Maritime Alps was on the borders of Italy and
Narbonensis. Augustus had made it a separate province under a procurator.
Tacitus (ii 12) describes how Otho's troops on their march devastated Italy
like a foreign land, and how Marius Maturus, the procurator of the
Maritime Alps, hastily raised a levy of the natives to resist the invasion
of his province; but these raw forces were speedily routed by Otho's
trained soldiers, who took vengeance by burning Albintimilium (Ventimiglia). In Gallia Narbonensis the troops of Otho, supported by his fleet,
twice defeated the detachments sent by Fabius Valens for the protection
of the province; but they withdrew after their victories to Albigaunum
(Albenga) in Liguria.
Placentiam: mod. Piacenza, on the south bank of the Padus, near
where that river is joined by the Trebia. It was defended by Othonian
troops under Vestricius Spurinna, and Caecina, crossing the Padus,
assaulted it unsuccessfully and had to retreat across the river to his camp
at Cremona. A corps of gladiators who fought for Otho made their way
over to the northern bank and routed the Vitellian auxiliaries near Cremona.
When Otho's generals (Paulinus, Celsus, and Gallus) would not follow up
this success, they were accused of treason by their own men, and Otho
summoned his brother Titianus, who was prefect at Rome, to act as
generalissimo of his army (Tac. ii 17-23).
ad Castoris: sc. aedes, the place being named from the temple of
Castor and Pollux there; Tacitus (ii 24) calls it “locus Castorum,” Orosius
(vii 8, 6) more briefly "Castores” (Pliny, N.H. vii 86, x 121, similarly
calls the temple of the twins Castor and Pollux at Rome, “aedes
Castorum''). Lucien Herr (Revue de Philol. xvii, 1893, p. 208 sqq.) argues
that locus castorum (not Castorum) should be read in Tac. (l.c.), the
meaning being "the place of beavers (fibrorum)” which were numerous
in the rivers of that region.
He thinks that Suetonius misunderstood
“castorum” and wrote "ad Castoris" as if the god were referred to.
Tacitus defines the position of the place as 12 miles E. of Cremona on
the Via Postumia in the direction of Betriacum and Mantua. The
Othonian forces under Paulinus, Celsus, and Gallus were now concentrated
at Betriacum. Caecina with the Vitellians at Cremona, eager to wipe out
his defeat at Placentia, arranged an ambush on the Via Postumia to
ensnare the Othonians at Locus Castorum, but Celsus and Paulinus skilfully planted a counter-ambuscade and encircled the forces of Caecina;
Paulinus, however, for some mysterious reason (treachery was freely hinted
at) did not press his advantage, though it seems that he might have utterly
routed the Vitellians and captured their camp at Cremona. See Tac. ii
24-26, Plut. Oth. 7, and the excellent description (with plan) of the battle
of Locus Castorum in Bury's Student's Roman Empire c. 19.
Betriacum: the name of this village appears with different spellings:
the best MSS. of Suetonius give the form with "t" (corruptly here
bretiacum, in Vitell. 10 betriacensi, in Vesp. 5 bretiacensi); Βητριακόν
occurs in Plut. Oth. 8; Betricum in Eutrop. vii 17; Tacitus (H. ii 42, etc.)
uses Bedriacum, so too Pliny (N.H. x 135) Bedriacensibus bellis; in
Juvenal ii 106 the MSS. give Bebriacis campis, and the adj. Bebriacus is
found in the Schol. on that line and also on line 99, as well as in Priscian ii
43. Lucien Herr (see preceding note) thinks the true form is Bebriacum,
a Celtic name from the same root bebr or bibr as appears in Bebronna,
Bibrax, Bibracte, Bibroci, etc., so that the meaning of Bebriacum is
“pagus fibrorum” i.e. "district of beavers," and “locus castorum” in
Tac. H. ii 24 is a translation of it. See Friedlaender on Juv. ii 106, and
Hofstee on our passage. Tacitus (ii 23) describes the position of
Betriacum: inter Veronam Cremonamque situs est vicus, duabus iam
Romanis cladibus notus infaustusque (i.e. the defeat of Otho's forces on
Apr. 14 (?), 69 A.D. by Caecina and Valens, and the defeat of Caecina and
Valens towards the end of Oct. in the same year by Antonius Primus the
lieutenant of Vespasian). Neither of the two battles of Betriacum was
fought at Betriacum itself, but on the road from it to Cremona and much
nearer to Cremona, the attacking forces advancing from Betriacum. The
battle which proved so disastrous to Otho was fought partly on the high
road and partly in the groves and vineyards at either side; cf. Tac. ii 42,
Et per locos arboribus ac vineis impeditos non una pugnae facies: comminus eminus, catervis et cuneis concurrebant. In aggere viae (i.e. the
raised causeway of the Via Postumia) conlato gradu corporibus et umbonibus niti, omisso pilorum iactu gladiis et securibus galeas loricasque perrumpere:
noscentes inter se, ceteris conspicui, in eventum totius belli
certabant. The army of Otho broke and fled to Betriacum and capitulated
on the following morning. For a discussion of Otho's strategy see
Henderson, Civil War and Rebellion in the Rom. Emp. 92 sqq., and the
criticism of Henderson's views by Hardy, J. Ph. xxxi 123 sqq.
spe conloquii: cf. Tac. ii 41, where we are told that two of Otho's
officers came asking for a parley with Caecina, and before he could reply
scouts reported that Otho's forces were already advancing to attack:
Eodem die ad Caecinam operi pontis intentum duo praetorianarum cohortium
tribuni conloquium eius postulantes venerunt. Audire condiciones ac
reddere parabat, cum praecipites exploratores adesse hostem nuntiavere.
Interruptus tribunorum sermo, eoque incertum fuit, insidias an proditionem
vel aliquod honestum consilium coeptaverint. Tacitus goes on to tell how
when Otho's army came near to the enemy a sudden rumour spread among
them that the army (Plut., Oth. 12, says the generals) of Vitellius had
deserted. Whether this rumour was spread by the spies of Vitellius or
originated through treachery or by chance among the partizans of Otho,
was never known. The Othonians took the initiative in peaceful overtures
by greeting the foe (ultro salutavere), but were answered by angry shouts,
while several on their own side, hearing and not understanding the greeting,
thought they were being betrayed. Any further misunderstanding was
prevented by the Vitellians making a fierce onslaught. Plutarch gives the
same account and says that the van of Otho's army greeted their adversaries
in friendly fashion as fellow-soldiers (ἠσπάσαντο φιλίως συστρατιώτας προσαγορεύσαντες).
consalutatione: this is the reading of Q.; the other MSS., including
M, have consultatione (‘“'nescio an rectius" Ihm). consalutatio is used
in the same way of soldiers' mutual greetings in Tac. H. iv 72, nulla inter
coeuntes exercitus consalutatio; id. A. xv 16, maesti manipuli
prae fletu usurpata consalutatio.
,
vix
§ 3. impetum capit: "came to a quick decision," "formed a sudden
resolve (subitum consilium)" on the analogy of capere consilium; cf.
Calig. 43, expeditionis Germanicae impetum cepit: Aug. 42, 3, impetum se
cepisse scribit frumentationes abolendi: Ner. 48, 1, revocato rursus impetu
"changing his hasty resolve”: Curt. v 12, 1, Bessus occidendi protinus
regis impetum ceperat.
dominationem sibi asserere: cf. the epitaph written by Verginius
Rufus for his own tomb: Hic situs est Rufus, pulso qui Vindice quondam |
imperium asseruit non sibi sed patriae (Plin. Ep. vi 10).
quippe: Trachmann (De conjunctionum causalium ap. Suet. usu, p. 41)
says, "Verba 'quippe
subirent' ad praecedentia 'desperatione ulla
aut diffidentia' ita spectant, ut 'quippe residuis integrisque
venientibus aliis' referenda sint ad vocem 'desperatione, verba
victis quidem adeo afflictis (sc. et quippe ne quidem)' ad vocem
‘diffidentia.' Itaque duo membra enuntiati ex 'quippe' suspensi
ἀσυνδετικῶς posita sunt.”
et super-
'ne
residuis integrisque (copiis): the strong force which he had taken
with him when he withdrew to Brixellum before the battle of Betriacum.
ad secundos casus: the meaning seems to be that given by Beroaldus,
“Noluit Otho primo discrimini casuique bellico committere copias omnes,
sed partem militum sibi reservaverat ad fortunam bellicam, casumque
secundo tentandum.” Baumg.-Cr. and the Thes. Ling. Lat. cite this as
an example of secundus = felix, which is unsatisfactory. Bentley would
alter either secundos to adversos or casus to iactus.
aliis e Dalmatia Pannoniaque et Moesia: cf. Tac. ii 44, Praetorianus
miles non virtute se sed proditione victum fremebat. Ne Vitellianis quidem
incruentam fuisse victoriam, pulso equite, rapta legionis aquila; superesse
cum ipso Othone militum quod trans Padum fuerit; venire Moesiacas
legiones; magnam exercitus partem Bedriaci remansisse: hos certe nondum
victos, et si ita ferret, honestius in acie perituros: ib. c. 46, Nec praetoriani
tantum, proprius Othonis miles, sed praemissi e Moesia eandem obstinationem
adventantis exercitus, legiones Aquileiam ingressas nuntiabant, ut nemo
dubitet potuisse renovari bellum atrox, lugubre, incertum victis et victoribus. We are told in Tac. ii 11 that two legions (vii Galbiana and xiii
Gemina) from Pannonia and two (xi Claudia and xiv Gemina Martia
Victrix) from Dalmatia were moving to the support of Otho, and that
2000 men from each of them had been sent on in advance. It is not clear
what portion of these forces had arrived in time to take part in the
battle of Betriacum (Spooner, Tac. Hist. Introd. pp. 75, 79). From Moesia
three legions (iii Gallica, vii Claudia, viii Augusta) or three detachments
of them (see Vesp. 6, 2 and notes) had come by the passes of the Julian
Alps and had reached (or were approaching) Aquileia, when they received
news of the defeat and death of Otho.
ne victis quidem
subirent: the eagerness of Otho's defeated
forces for another encounter is described in Tac. ii 46, Non expectavit
militum ardor vocem imperatoris. Bonum haberet animum iubebant:
superesse adhuc novas vires et ipsos extrema passuros ausurosque. Neque
erat adulatio: ire in aciem, excitare partium fortunam furore quodam et
instinctu flagrabant. Plutarch (Oth. 15) says that it was not wonderful
that Otho's friends should have done their best to encourage him, but
the passionate affection of his soldiers passed all belief (τὸ δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
πάθος ἅπασαν ὑπερέβαλε πίστιν); not one of them deserted him to go over
to the victors.
CHAPTER 10.
Laetus: all the MSS., except M, have the reading “Lenis." Macé
(Essai sur Suétone, p. 31 sq.) points out that if "Lenis” were what
Suetonius wrote, the origin of "Laetus” would be inexplicable;
"Laetus,” on the other hand, would easily be corrupted into "Lenis," the
successive stages being LAETVS, LETVS, LENS, LENIS; it would also be felt
that "Lenis," as a cognomen for the father, corresponded with "Tranquillus," the cognomen of the son.
tertiae decimae legionis: Mommsen's view that the 13th legion
(Gemina) was created by Augustus in 6 A.D. is rejected by Parker (Roman
Legions p. 78 sqq.) and Ritterling (in Pauly-Wissowa xii 1711).
After
the disaster to Varus in 9 A.D. it was brought (perhaps from Illyricum)
to Vindonissa (Windisch) in Upper Germany. Under Claudius (in 45 or
46) it was transferred to Pannonia, whence it came to support Otho (see
on c. 9, 3). It was defeated at Betriacum by the 5th legion (Alaudae),
the legionaries attributing their defeat to their legatus Vedius Aquila
(Tac. H. ii 43 sq.). Vitellius, after his victory, put it to the forced labour
of building amphitheatres at Cremona and Bononia (Tac. ii 67, iii 32).
It was then sent back to its quarters at Poetovio in Pannonia, but was
immediately recalled to support Vespasian, and took part in the victory
at Cremona over the Vitellians (Tac. iii 1, 21, 27, 32), after which it was
sent back to Pannonia.
tribunus angusticlavius: i.e. a tribune of equestrian birth; see on
''tribunus laticlavius,'' Dom. 10, 5.
..
deinde
..
mox: here, as frequently, = post, postea; used in this sense in enumerations also, e.g. Iul. 22, 1, initio. mox: Aug. 19, 1, prima
тох exin.. ac praeter has item.. ad extremum: Vitell. 12, тох
et rursus iterum deinde: 15, 4, primum..dein. ac mox (cf. Tac. A. xi
22, primum deinde mox post). The generally accepted view that
mox for postea is merely post-class. is contested by H. J. Rose, Class.
Quart. xxi 2.
de Cassi Brutique exitu: both these leaders of the conspiracy against
Julius Caesar perished by the sword. In the first engagement at Philippi
(42 в.с.) С. СCassius, hard-pressed and isolated, mistaking for the pursuing
foe a force of cavalry which M. Brutus had sent to his support, laid bare
his neck and commanded his freedman Pindarus to cut off his head (Plut.
Brut. 43); twenty days afterwards, at the second encounter on the same
ground, Brutus, routed by Octavius and Antonius, threw himself on his
own sword (ib. 52).
nec concursurum cum Galba fuisse: concurrere must be used here in
the general sense of opposing, or disputing another's title (certamen de
imperio suscipere, Baumg.-Cr.); Burman points out that it cannot bear its
more usual meaning of committere proelium, for (1) the statement of
Suetonius would be a contradiction, being equivalent to non gesturum
fuisse bellum nisi confideret sine bello rem transigi posse; and (2) Otho
never did join battle with Galba, he merely won over the praetorians, who
gave him the empire and slew Galba. Bentley conjectured occisurum eum
Galbam.
exemplo manipularis militis: Dio (lxiv 11) tells this story in the
same form as Suetonius: ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ τοῦ ῎Οθωνος ἐκρατήθησαν, ἤγγειλε μὲν ἱππεύς
τις τὸ πάθος τῷ Ὄθωνι˙ καὶ ἐπειδή γε ἠπιστεῖτο πρὸς τῶν παρόντων (ἔτυχον γὰρ πολλοὶ
κατὰ τύχην ἠθροισμένοι) καὶ οἱ μὲν δραπέτην (fugitivum) οἱ δὲ καὶ πολέμιον αὐτὸν
ἀπεκάλουν, “ εἴθε γάρ” ἔφη “ ψευδῆ ταῦτα, Καῖσαρ, ἦν· ἥδιστα γὰρ ἂν νικῶντός σου
ἐτελεύτησα. νῦν δὲ ἐγὼ μὲν πάντως οἰχήσομαι, ἵνα μή μέ τις ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ καταπεφευγέναι δόξῃ, σὺ δὲ βουλεύου, ὡς τῶν πολεμίων οὐκ ἐς μακρὰν ἡξόντων, ὅ τι χρὴ
πρᾶξαι.” καὶ ὁ μὲν ταῦτ᾽ εἰπὼν ἑαυτὸν διεχρήσατο. Plutarch (Oth. 15) says that
the incident occurred when the soldiers after the defeat at Betriacum were
imploring Otho not to leave them but to use, as long as there was life in
them, their souls and bodies in his service: Εἷς δὲ τῶν ἀφανεστέρων ἀνατείνας
τὸ ξίφος καὶ εἰπών “Ἴσθι, Καῖσαρ, οὕτως ὑπὲρ σοῦ παρατεταγμένους (prepared
to die) ἅπαντας” ἀπέσφαξεν ἑαυτόν. Tacitus (H. iii 54) tells a similar story
of Julius Agrestis, a centurion in the army of Vitellius, who persuaded
Vitellius to allow him to go and ascertain the extent of the disaster which
their army had sustained at Cremona against Vespasian's forces, and
when he brought back his report of the losses incurred, Vitellius refused
to believe him and charged him with having been bribed, whereupon
Agrestis: quandoquidem” inquit “magno documento opus est, nec alius
iam tibi aut vitae aut mortis meae usus, dabo cui credas." Atque ita
digressus voluntaria morte dicta firmavit.
..
non amplius. coniecturum: cf Tac. ii 47, hunc animum, hanc virtutem
vestram ultra periculis obicere nimis grande vitae meae pretium puto:
Eutrop. vii 17, petentibus militibus, ne tam cito de belli desperaret eventu,
cum tanti se non esse dixisset, ut propter eum bellum civile moveretur, etc.
Tacitus (l.c.), Plutarch (Oth. 15), and Dio (lxiv 13) all put into the
mouth of Otho a last speech in which he refuses to yield to the entreaties
of his soldiers who implored him to continue the struggle; he points out
to them that by dying he will benefit the State more than by continuing
to live, and that his death will be a glorious death, if by it are ended the
horrors of civil strife. Hardy (on Plut. l.c.) says "No doubt all these
speeches are inventions of the authors themselves"; but we may be sure
that Otho took leave of his men in a speech on some such lines as these.
§ 2. fratrem: Lucius Salvius Otho Titianus; see on c. 1, 3.
fratris filium: Lucius Salvius Otho Cocceianus (or Cocceius, Κοκκήϊος
Plut.), who was spared by Vitellius, but was put to death by Domitian,
nearly 20 years afterwards, for keeping the birthday of his uncle the
emperor Otho; see Dom. 10, 3. Plutarch (Oth. 16) describes how Otho
bade his nephew have no fear of Vitellius whose family he himself had
preserved unhurt; he tells him that he had intended to adopt him as his
son but postponed it from considerations of his safety, and he gives him
a last warning neither to forget nor to be too mindful of the fact that
his uncle had been a Caesar (μήτε ἐπιλαθέσθαι παντάπασι μήτε ἄγαν μνημονεύειν, ὅτι Καίσαρα θεῖον ἔσχες). Cf. Tac. ii 48, Mox Salvium Cocceianum,
fratris filium prima iuventa, trepidum et maerentem ultro solatus est,
laudando pietatem eius, castigando formidinem: an Vitellium tam inmitis
animi fore, ut pro incolumi tota domo ne hanc quidem sibi gratiam
redderet? Mereri se festinato exitu clementiam victoris: non enim ultima
desperatione, sed poscente proelium exercitu, remisisse rei publicae novissimum casum. Satis sibi nominis, satis posteris suis nobilitatis quaesitum.
Post Iulios Claudios Servios se primum in familiam novam imperium intulisse. Proinde erecto animo capesseret vitam, neu patruum sibi Othonem
fuisse aut oblivisceretur umquam aut nimium meminisset.
singulos amicorum cohortatus: Tac. (l.c.), Talia locutus, ut cuique
aetas aut dignitas, comiter appellatos, irent propere neu remanendo iram
victoris asperarent, iuvenes auctoritate, senes precibus movebat, placidus
ore, intrepidus verbis, intempestivas suorum lacrimas coercens. Dari naves
ac vehicula abeuntibus iubet.
osculo: see on c. 6, 2.
secreto: see on c. 3, 1.
binos: the distributive numeral, because codicilli is one of the words
regularly used in the plural only.
codicillos: thin tablets of wood (codices, caudices) covered with wax,
used for notes or hasty jottings with a stilus. The word can denote either
the tablets or the writing on them; e.g. Cic. Fam. ix 26, harum (litterarum)
exemplum in codicillos exaravi: Sen. Ep. 55, adeo tecum sum, ut dubitem,
an incipiam non epistulas sed codicillos tibi scribere. See also Marquardt,
Privatl. p. 804.
exaravit: exarare, “to plough up," was used metaph. of the furrows
traced in the wax by the stilus. Cicero uses it freely, but only in his
Letters; Suetonius uses it also in Ner. 52, versus quasi a cogitante atque
generante exaratas: vit. Lucan., codicillos ad patrem exaravit.
..
..
sororem: see c. 1, 3, where she is mentioned as betrothed to Drusus,
son of Germanicus.
His
Messalinam: Statilia Messalina, granddaughter of T. Statilius Taurus
(cons. 11 A.D.), and probably daughter of T. Statilius Taurus (cons. 44 A.D.)
who was a grandson of the orator Messala (see Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 266).
She was the third of Nero's wives, being married to him c. 66 A.D.
previous wives were Octavia and Poppaea. After Poppaea's death, caused
by his own brutality (see on c. 3, 1), he wished to marry Antonia, daughter
of the emperor Claudius, and when she refused he put her to death. He
then selected Messalina, and as she was already married to Atticus
Vestinus (cons. 65 A.D.) he had her husband put to death merely for having
knowingly married one who numbered Nero among her paramours (Tac.
A. xv 68 sq., Suet. Ner. 35). The Schol. on Juv. vi 434, where the poet
satirizes literary ladies, says that the accomplished Messalina is aimed at:
“Statiliam Messalinam significat, quae post quattuor matrimonia diverso
exitu soluta postremo Neroni nupsit; post quem interemptum et opibus et
forma et ingenio plurimum viguit. Consectata est usum eloquentiae usque
ad studium declamandi.
Illo tempore duae Messalinae fuerunt, haec et
Valeria de qua Claudius Britannicum filium sustulit." For coins with her
name and image see Cohen, i² p. 316; Eckhel, vi 287 sq.
Neronis: sc. uxorem. In expressing relationship the appellative nouns
(uxor, filius, etc.) are at times omitted as in Greek. This is most frequent
in poetry and post-Aug. prose, but there are a few instances in Cicero
(Kühner-Stegmann, i 414).
quicquid epistularum erat
concremavit: Tac. ii 48, libellos
("petitions'') epistulasque studio erga se aut in Vitellium contumeliis insignes abolet (= concremat): Zonar. xi 15, τά τε γράμματα ὅσα τινὲς αὐτῷ
κατ᾿ ἐκείνου ἐγεγράφεσαν ἔκαυσεν, ὥστε μηδένα ἐξ αὐτῶν φωραθέντα κινδυνεῦσαι, καὶ
καλῶν ἕνα ἕκαστον τῶν παρόντων ἠσπάζετο αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐδίδου σφίσι χρήματα. For
quicquid c. gen. see on Galb. 1.
divisit pecunias domesticis: Tacitus (who does not specify to whom
the money was given) says that he distributed it sparingly and not like a
man about to die: pecunias distribuit parce nec ut periturus. Plutarch
(Oth. 17) states that he carefully rewarded each servant according to his
deserts, not squandering the money lavishly merely because he knew that
it would soon be another's: τοὺς οἰκέτας προσεκαλεῖτο, καὶ φιλοφρονούμενος
διένεμε τῶν χρημάτων τῷ μὲν πλέον, τῷ δὲ ἔλαττον, οὐχ ὥσπερ ἀλλοτρίων ἀφειδῶν,
ἀλλὰ τὸ κατ᾿ ἀξίαν καὶ τὸ μέτριον ἐπιμελῶς φυλάττων. According to Plut. it was
not till later in the evening, after he had chosen the dagger with which
to slay himself (see Suet. c. 11, 2), that he made this distribution of money
to his servants.
CHAPTER 11.
tumultu exorto: Tac. ii 49, Post quae, dimotis omnibus, paulum
requievit. Atque illum, supremas iam curas animo volutantem, repens
tumultus avertit, nuntiata consternatione ac licentia militum: namque
abeuntibus exitium minitabantur: Plut. (Oth. 16), Γενόμενος δὲ ἀπὸ τούτων
μετὰ μικρὸν ἤκουσε θορύβου καὶ βοῆς ἐπὶ θύραις. Οἱ γὰρ στρατιῶται τῶν συγκλητικῶν
(senatorum) τοῖς ἀπιοῦσι διηπείλουν ἀποσφάξειν, εἰ μὴ παραμενοῦσιν, ἀλλ᾽ οἰχήσονται
τὸν αὐτοκράτορα (Imperatorem) καταλιπόντες.
inter moras: the same phrase is used in Ner. 49, 2, where Nero is
hesitating to slay himself and a letter arrives stating that he has been
proclaimed a public enemy: inter moras perlatos a cursore Phaonti codicillos
praeripuit legitque se hostem a senatu iudicatum.
coeptabant: this verb only here in Suet.; twice in Cic. (Fin. v 24,
Arat. 131); most frequent in poets and Tac. For the use of "frequentative forms by Suet. see App. I § 7. b.
detineri: the soldiers were extreme in their violence against
Verginius Rufus, whose house they blockaded and besieged: Tac. ii 49,
atrocissima in Verginium vi, quem clausa domo obsidebant. Verginius,
the conqueror of Vindex (Galb. 9, 2), had been appointed by Otho to be
consul suffectus for the year. After Otho's death the soldiers tumultuously
demanded that he should undertake the empire, but he managed to slip
away from them: Tac. ii 51, per aversam domus partem furtim digressus
inrumpentes frustratus est.
Adiciamus noctem: these words, in which Otho announced the
postponement of his death for a few hours, are not mentioned by Tacitus
or Plutarch. Cf. Hor. C. iv 7, 17, Quis scit an adiciant hodiernae crastina
summae (al. vitae) Tempora di superi?
his ipsis totidemque verbis: totidem verbis is often used of copies
or translations "word for word"; e.g. Cic. Att. vi 2, istum ego locum
totidem verbis a Dicaearcho transtuli: Fin. ii 100, totidem verbis interpretari. The emphasis which Suetonius lays on the accuracy of his statement of Otho's words may be due to a desire to correct some current
misrepresentation of them.
vetuit vim cuiquam fieri: cf. Tac. c. 49, increpitis seditionis auctoribus
regressus vacavit abeuntium adloquiis, donec omnes inviolati discederent.
Plutarch (Oth. 16) describes how Otho sternly quelled the disorder: πάλιν
οὖν προῆλθεν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνδρῶν φοβηθείς, καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας οὐκέτι δεητικὸς οὐδὲ
πρᾷος, ἀλλὰ τραχὺς ὀφθεὶς καὶ μετ᾿ ὀργῆς εἰς τὸ θορυβοῦν μάλιστα διαβλέψας ἀπελθεῖν
ἐποίησεν εἴξαντας καὶ διατρέσαντας.
potestatem sui praebuit: cf. Tib. 40, potestatem omnibus adeundi sui
fecit: ib. 34, 2, qui potestatem sui die festo non habuissent: Cic. Q.
Fratr. i 2, cum neque praetores diebus aliquot adiri possent vel potestatem
sui facerent.
•
§2. sedata siti potione: Tac. c. 49, vesperascente die sitim haustu
gelidae aquae sedavit: Plut. c. 17, ἤδη δὲ ἑσπέρας οὔσης ἐδίψησε, καὶ πιὼν
ὀλίγον ὕδατος, κ.τ.λ.
explorata utriusque acie: Tac. (l.c.), tum adlatis pugionibus < duobus >,
cum utrumque pertemptassset, alterum capiti subdidit. Plutarch says the
test took some time: δυεῖν ὄντων αὐτῷ ξιφῶν, ἑκατέρου κατεμάνθανε τὸ σπάσμα
(i.e. the blade drawn from the scabbard) πολὺν χρόνον. Similarly Nero,
when he heard that he was to be punished "more maiorum,” tested the
edges of two daggers: Ner. 49, 2, conterritus duos pugiones, quos secum
extulerat, arripuit temptataque utriusque acie rursus condidit, causatus
nondum adesse fatalem horam.
cum alterum pulvino subdidisset: cf. Dom. 17, 2, pugionem subditum
pulvino.
foribus adopertis: this use of adopertus in the sense of clausus (its
normal meaning being tectus, obvolutus velamine quodam) is found earlier
only in Ov. Met. i 713, vidit succubuisse oculos adopertaque lumina.
somno.
artissimo somno: cf. Aug. 16, 1, arto repente somno devinctus: Cic.
Rep. 6, 10, те artior, quam solebat, somnus complexus est. Tacitus (c.
49) puts it less strongly: noctem quietam, utque adfirmatur, non insomnem
egit; Plutarch (c. 17) agrees with Suet.: ἀποπέμψας δὲ τούτους ἤδη τὸ
λοιπὸν ἀνεπαύετο τῆς νυκτός, ὥστε τοὺς κατευναστὰς (cubicularios) αἰσθάνεσθαι
βαθέως αὐτοῦ καθεύδοντος. Cf. the description given by Pliny (Ep. vi 16, 13)
of the deep sleep of his uncle, Pliny the Elder, during the eruption of
Vesuvius in 79 A.D.: Tum se quieti dedit, et quievit verissimo quidem
somno. Nam meatus animae (‘his snoring'")
ab iis qui limini obversabantur (i.e. the cubicularii) audiebatur.
..
circa lucem: circa is used only of place (and that rarely) in Cic. and
Caes.; from Livy onwards it is used of time as well, e.g. Suet. Claud. 7,
circa initia imperii: Iul. 88, circa undecimam horam; also of number
"about" (= ad, circiter), e.g. Claud. 6, 2, circa sestertium vicies. For
other uses see on Tit. 4, 3; Dom. 3, 2.
uno se traiecit ictu: Dio lxiv 15, ξιφίδιον λαβὼν ἑαυτὸν διεχρήσατο :
Mart. vi 32, 4, et fodit certa pectora tota manu. Tacitus (c. 49) says that
he fell with his breast upon the steel: Luce prima in ferrum pectore incubuit. Plutarch (c. 17) gives fuller details. He describes how when
Otho awoke he sent a freedman to enquire about the senators, and when
he returned and said that they had all departed safely, Otho bade him go
and show himself to the soldiers that they might not afterwards slay him
for having helped to cause his death (as Epaphroditus aided Nero in his
suicide, see on Dom. 14, 4). As soon as the freedman had gone, Otho
placed his sword upright, and holding it with both hands threw himself
upon it and died with a single groan.
irrumpentibus ad primum gemitum: Tac. (l.c.) ad gemitum morientis
ingressi liberti servique et Plotius Firmus praetorii praefectus unum volnus
invenere.
...
celeriter funeratus: funerare meaning "to give funeral rites to"
is post-Aug. funeratus means "done to death" in Hor. C. iii 8, 7, prope
funeratus Arboris ictu. Otho had given orders for his hasty burial to
prevent his body being mutilated and made a mock of: cf. Tac. (l.c.),
Funus maturatum: ambitiosis ("earnest") id precibus petierat, ne
amputaretur caput ludibrio futurum (an indignity inflicted on the corpse
of Galba, see Galb. 20, 2). For the simple monument erected over his
grave see Vitell. 10, 3.
tricensimo et octavo aetatis anno: this erroneous statement is
repeated (as usual) by Eutropius (vii 17): voluntaria morte obiit, trigesimo
octavo aetatis anno. Otho was born on Apr. 28, 32 A.D. (see c. 2) and
died on Apr. 16 or 17, 69 A.D., so that he lived 37 years, all but 12 or 11
days, as Dio (lxiv 15) accurately states: τοῦτο τὸ τέλος τῷ Ὄθωνι ἐγένετο,
ζήσαντι ἑπτὰ καὶ τριάκοντα ἔτη, ἕνδεκα ἡμερῶν δέοντα. Tacitus (ii 49) and
[Aurelius Victor] Epit. 7 say that he died in his 37th year; Plutarch
(Oth. 18) says more loosely: ἔτη ἑπτὰ καὶ τριάκοντα βιώσας. According to
Oudendorp and Baumg.-Cr. the inaccurate statement of Suetonius, that
Otho died in his 38th year, is due to a method of calculation by which
the year of birth and year of death are both included. There are similar
difficulties in the statements of Suetonius with regard to the length of
life or length of rule in the case of Galba (see on Galb. 23), Vitellius (see
on Vitell. 18), and of Titus (see on Tit. 11).
nonagensimo et quinto imperii die: this too is accepted by Eutropius
(l.c.); Dio (l.c.) says that he reigned 90 days; Plutarch (l.c.) 3 months;
Josephus (Bell. Iud. iv 9,9) 92 days. Galba was slain on Jan. 15 and
Otho's reign began on that day, but there is no means of fixing definitely
the day in April on which he died. Opinion is divided between the 15th
(so Schiller, Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit), the 16th (so Krauss, De vitarum imp.
Othonis fide quaestiones), and the 17th (so Puhl, De Oth. et Vit. imp.
quaest.). Nagl (in Pauly-Wissowa, i A. 2053) strongly favours the 16th,
and points out in support of this date that Tacitus (H. ii 55) says that
news of Otho's death was brought into the theatre at Rome during the
celebration of the Ludi Cereales (Apr. 13-19). On the last day (Apr. 19)
of the Ludi Cereales there were games in the Circus, and if the news
arrived on that day it would have been brought to the Circus, not to the
theatre. The news probably reached Rome late on the 18th, and it was
not till the following day that the senate formally appointed Vitellius as
emperor (cf. Henzen Act. Fratr. Arv. p. xciv, “ob diem imperi [Vitelli]
Germanici imp. quod xiii K. Mai. statutum est"). Allowing 2 days for
the message to arrive from Brixellum (367 Roman miles from Rome), Otho
died on the 16th, and the battle of Betriacum took place on the 14th (cf.
Holzapfel, Klio xiii 289 sqq.). If we assume then that Otho died on
Apr. 16, he died on the 92nd day of his reign; Suetonius, who says that
he died on the 95th, apparently reckoned from Jan. 15 (date of Otho's
accession) to Apr. 19 (date of Vitellius' accession).
CHAPTER 12.
animo nequaquam corpus competit: competit is a contracted perf.,
like petit, c. 7, 1. Suetonius uses competere absolutely in Aug. 31, 3, si
cuiusquam neptium suarum competeret aetas (i.e. if any of them were of
eligible age for the post of Vestal); in Iul. 40, 1, it takes the abl. (according
to the best MSS.): fastos.. adeo turbatos, ut neque messium feriae aestate
(v.l. aestati) neque vindemiarum autumno competerent. The dat. is the
normal constr. with competere in the sense of "congruere, consentire, convenire, aptum esse"; cf. Nonius (276 M., 424 Lindsay), conpetere, par
esse vel simile. unde et in aestimatione rerum “hoc illi conpetit” dicimus.
modicae staturae: see on Galb. 21.
male pedatus: "ill-set on his feet" ("splay-footed," Clarke). pedatus
(ὑπόπους) is not applied to persons elsewhere; the verb is used metaph. of
vines in the sense of suffulcire; Colum. iv 12, vineae pedandae cura:
Plin. N.H. xvii 164, vineae pedatae simplici iugo.
scambus: i.e. with the legs bent out and the feet bent in, bow-legged,
bandy-legged. This seems to be the only place where the late Gr. word
σκαμβός is found in Latin. The usual word is varus; cf. Varr. R.R. ii 9,
(canes) debent esse cruribus rectis et potius varis quam vatiis, which is
rendered by the compiler of the Geoponica (xix 2): σκαμβότερα μᾶλλον ἢ
βλαισά. In our passage the MSS. have cambus, which Turnebus altered
to scambus. Bonnet (Archiv Lat. Lex. 13, 579) defends cambus as the
more correct form. He says it is a Gallic word which became completely
Latinised, since it serves as a cognomen of different persons, of whom
one is mentioned in an African inscription of 329 A.D. (Ephem. epigr. v
p. 179).
munditiarum muliebrium: cf. Liv. xxxiv 7, munditiae et ornatus et
cultus, haec feminarum insignia sunt, his gaudent et gloriantur, hunc
mundum muliebrem appellarunt maiores nostri: Ulp. Dig. xxxiv 2, 25, 10,
mundus muliebris est, quo mulier mundior fit; continentur eo specula,
matulae, unguenta, etc.: Sall. Iug. 85 (Marius speaking), ex parente meo
et ex aliis sanctis viris ita accepi, munditias mulieribus, viris laborem convenire: Claud. Eutrop. ii 336, minimeque viriles | munditiae, compti voltus,
onerique vel ipsa | serica (“silken garments"). Juvenal (ii 99) ridicules
the mirror (speculum) which Otho carried with him on his campaigns: Ille
tenet speculum, pathici gestamen Othonis, | Actoris Aurunci spolium, quo
se ille videbat | armatum cum iam tolli vexilla iuberet- | res memoranda
novis annalibus atque recenti | historia, speculum civilis sarcina belli (the
allusions are to the shield described as “magni gestamen Abantis,” Aen.
iii 286, and the spear which Turnus was so proud of having taken from
Actor, “Actoris Aurunci spolium,” Aen. xii 94). Seneca (N.Q. i 17) is
equally severe on the “sarcinae militares" carried by effeminate Romans:
Adeoque omnia indiscreta sunt perversissimis artibus, ut quicquid mundus
muliebris vocabatur, sarcinae viriles sint: minus dico, etiam militares.
Iam speculum ornatus tantum causa adhibitum, nulli non vitio necessarium
factum est.
vulso corpore: cf. Galb. 22, n.
galericulo: "peruke.” galericulum is a dimin. of galerum (also
galerus and galera) which, like κυνέη, was used for a cap made from an
animal's skin with the fur or hair left on it; such caps were worn by
country labourers, and rustic warriors (e.g. Aen. vii 688; in Frontin.
Strateg. iv 7, 29 galericulum is used for the leather headgear of the
velites); they were also worn by athletes to save their hair from the
unguents used in wrestling, e.g. Mart. xiv 50 (entitled “Galericulum''),
Ne lutet immundum nitidos ceroma capillos, | hac poteris madidas condere
pelle comas. Then galerum and galericulum came to mean a peruke or
wig made of fine skin with human hair attached; Martial (xii 45) mentions
one made of kid, Haedina tibi pelle contegenti | nudae tempora (“brows'')
verticemque calvae ("skull") | festive tibi, Phoebe, dixit ille | qui dixit
caput esse calceatum (“well-shod"). Such wigs were worn at times as
disguises, e.g. by Nero on his nightly escapades, Ner. 26, 1, adrepto pilleo
vel galero popinas inibat, and by the notorious Messalina in her debauchery,
Juv. vi 120, nigrum flavo crinem abscondente galero. See Marquardt,
Privatl.2 603 sq.; Daremberg-Saglio, ii 1452 sq.
raritatem capillorum: cf. Plin. N.H. xxviii 163, ursinus adeps
emendat raritatem superciliorum: Suet. Calig. 50, 1, capillo raro ac circa
verticem nullo.
..
rasitare: this frequentative is post-Aug.; cf. Gell. iii 4, comperimus
viros barbam in eiusmodi aetate rasitavisse. With the introduction of
barbers from Sicily to Italy in 300 B.с. (Varr. R.R. ii 11, 10) the use of
the razor (novacula) became common.
been the first who was shaved daily;
radi cotidie instituit Africanus.
Scipio Africanus was said to have
Plin. N.H. vii 59, primus omnium
pane madido linere: Otho's use of bread-poultices for the face is
mentioned as one of his effeminacies by Juvenal (ii 103): Nimirum
summi ducis est occidere Galbam | et curare cutem, summi constantia
civis | Bebriacis campis spolium adfectare Palati | et pressum in
facie digitis extendere panem, | quod nec in Assyrio pharetrata Semiramis orbe, | maesta nec Actiaca fecit Cleopatra carina. Again in Sat. vi
461 sqq. Juvenal ridicules the use of these poultices (cataplasmata) by
women to beautify their complexions: Interea foeda aspectu ridendaque
multo | pane tumet facies aut pinguia Poppaeana | spirat, etc.
[“Рорраеапа" were cosmetics called after Poppaea, wife of Otho and
Nero (see Oth. 3), who was so careful of her beauty that she always
bathed in asses' milk; some of Otho's effeminate habits may have been
due to association with her.] Juvenal compares the removal of the
poultices to removing stucco: Tandem aperit vultum et tectoria prima
reponit. According to the Schol. on Juv. such poultices served two
purposes: (1) ad excandendam (‘brightening, whitening'') cutem; (2) ad
tendendam faciem aut cutem magis (a medicamen used to tighten the
skin and remove wrinkles was called tentipellium, Fest. p. 364 Müll.).
..
..
consuetum: for the irregular consecution of nom. and acc. in "fuisse
traditur. male pedatus.. rasitare. consuetum" see note on "dicitur
obmurmurasse,” c. 7, 2. Bentley would read consuetus.
a prima lanugine: lanugo was the first down of manhood; cf. Aen. x
324, flaventem prima lanugine malas: Juv. xiii 59, primaque par sacrae
lanugo senectae. The day on which the lanugo or first beard was shaved
was celebrated with sacrifices and rejoicings and the lanugo was dedicated
to some god; Nero dedicated his in a box adorned with costly pearls to
Jupiter Capitolinus (Ner. 12; cf. Juv. iii 186, Petron. Satyr. 29); Caligula
was exceptional: uno atque eodem die togam sumpsit barbamque posuit
sine ullo honore (Calig. 10, 1).
ne barbatus umquam esset: the usual practice was to allow the hair
on the face to grow again after the first ceremonial shaving (depositio
barbae). The young men at Rome (barbatuli iuvenes, bene barbati) wore
whiskers either without a beard or with a beard trimmed short; after the
age of 40 it was customary to be clean-shaven. See Daremberg-Saglio, i
669 sq.
sacra Isidis in lintea veste celebrasse: see on Dom. 1, 2, Isiaci habitu.
§ 2. putem: Suetonius frequently uses the potential subjunctive in
modest affirmations; e.g. Aug. 7, 1, satis certa probatione tradiderim:
16, 2, unde praebitam Antonio materiam putem: Vesp. 1, 4, non negaverim:
Gramm. 7, quod equidem non temere crediderim. See Madvig, L.G. § 350 b.
mors minime congruens vitae: the fact that "nothing in his life
became him like the leaving it" is noticed by several writers; cf. Dio lxiv
15, κάκιστά γε μὴν ἀνθρώπων ζήσας, κάλλιστα ἀπέθανε· καὶ κακουργότατα τὴν ἀρχὴν
(imperium) ἁρπάσας, ἄριστα αὐτῆς ἀπηλλάγη: Plut. Oth. 18, βιώσας γὰρ οὐδὲν ἐπιεικέστερον Νέρωνος ἀπέθανεν εὐγενέστερον: Mart. vi 32, Cum dubitaret adhuc
belli civilis Enyo | forsitan et posset vincere mollis Otho, | damnavit multo
staturum sanguine Martem | et fodit certa pectora tota manu. | Sit Cato,
dum vivit, sane vel Caesare maior: | dum moritur, numquid maior Othone
fuit: Auson. Caes. vii, Aemula polluto gesturus sceptra Neroni | obruitur
celeri raptus Otho exitio. | Fine tamen laudandus erit, qui morte decora |
hoc solum fecit nobile, quod periit: Tac. H. ii 31, Sane ante utriusque (i.e.
Otho and Vitellius) exitum, quo egregiam Otho famam, Vitellius flagitiosissimam meruere, minus Vitellii ignavae voluptates quam Othonis flagrantissimae libidines timebantur.
maiore miraculo fuerit: the dative maiori (Gr) appears in all the
early editions; maiore (MX) is read by Roth, Preud'homme, and Ihm.
It is questionable whether the ablative is defensible; the only parallel
seems to be a doubtful passage, Flor. ii 11, 6, alligati (the chained
captives) miraculo quodam (quidam, Lipsius) fuere, cum catenas morsibus
et ore tentassent. In Plin. N.H. xxvii 11, nec quicquam inter herbas
maiore equidem miraculo adspexi, the meaning is prob. "with greater
wonderment"; cf. xxxii 4, hoc est maioris miraculi (= hoc magis homines
admirantur): xii 1, arbor digna miraculo (= quam admiremur).
phrase miraculo esse often occurs, but in it miraculo is clearly the dative.
In Cic. Att. v 1, 4, multa mihi maiori stomacho quam ipsi Quinto fuerunt,
the MSS. give maiore; Orelli restored maiori, which is now the accepted
reading.
•
The
multi manus exosculati: Tac. H. ii 49, tulere corpus praetoriae
cohortes cum laudibus et lacrimis volnus manusque eius exosculantes. The
compound exosculari is stronger than the simple verb and denotes passionate
kissing. Plutarch (Oth. 17) describes the wild grief of the soldiers at
Otho's death and their self-reproaches for not having guarded him more
closely and hindered his dying for them. They took no thought for themselves, though the enemy was close at hand. They arrayed the body in
state, and in full armour bore it to the pyre: happy were those fortunate
enough to support the bier! Some kissed his wound, some clasped his
hand, while others, afar off, prostrated themselves.
vim suae vitae attulerunt: Tac. (l.c.), Quidam militum iuxta rogum
interfecere se, non noxa neque ob metum, sed aemulatione decoris et caritate
principis: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 7, (Otho) adeo amabilis militibus propriis,
ut plerique, corpore eius viso, suis manibus interierint: Dio lxiv 15, καί
τινες ἑαυτοὺς ἐπέσφαξαν αὐτῷ: Plut. (l.c.), ἔνιοι δὲ τῇ πυρᾷ λαμπάδας ὑφέντες
ἑαυτοὺς ἀπέσφαξαν. Plut. adds that it was not because they had received
any special favour from Otho, or that they feared the victor's vengeance;
it would seem that no king or tyrant was ever so passionately fond of
ruling as they were of being ruled by Otho. Even after his death their
affection for him continued and developed into an ineradicable hatred of
Vitellius.
multi et absentium: Tac. (l.c.), ac postea promisce ("among all
ranks'') Bedriaci Placentiae aliisque in castris celebratum (= saepius
adhibitum) id genus mortis.
prae dolore: this ante-class. and post-class. use of prae (= propter)
in a positive sentence occurs also in Iul. 39, 4; Aug. 65, 2; Tib. 66;
Calig. 4; Claud. 10, 2:32. In class. writers prae is used in this sense
only with an expressed or implied negative or with vix (Kühner-Stegmann,
i 513).
incolumem detestata: Plutarch (c. 18) says that those who praised
Otho's death were not less in number or in worth than those who blamed
his life: ἀπέθανε δὲ Ὄθων... ἀπολιπὼν μὴ χείρονας μήδ᾽ ἐλάττους τῶν τὸν βίον
αὐτοῦ ψεγόντων τοὺς ἐπαινοῦντας τὸν θάνατον.
laudibus tulit: this poetical use of ferre for effere is found in prose
from Livy on.
Galbam.. interemptum: the slaying of Galba, which was ordered by
Otho (see Oth. 6, 3), is characterised as a "facinus flagitiosissimum” by
Tacitus, H. ii 50: Duobus facinoribus, altero flagitiosissimo, altero egregio
(i.e. Otho's noble death), tantundem apud posteros meruit bonae famae
quantum malae.
rei publicae
restituendae: under the early Empire there was constant talk of the restoration of the old republican form of government,
especially after Nero's death (see on Galb. 10, 1). Augustus himself,
according to Suet. Aug. 28, twice thought of restoring the republic (de
reddenda re publica bis cogitavit) in 27 and 23 B.c.; but, as Shuckburgh
says in his note on that passage, all Augustus did in reality was to
elaborate the restitution of the forms of the republic so far as was consistent with his own supremacy. Cf. also Claud. 1, 4, where Suetonius
says that Drusus Germanicus (brother of Tiberius) made no secret of his
intention to revive the republic if ever he should have the power:
dissimulasse umquam pristinum se rei p. statum, quandoque posset,
restituturum.
nec
CHAPTER 1.
nobilem: so [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 8, 1, Vitellius ortus familia nobili;
contrast Eutrop. vii 18, 1, Vitellius . . familia honorata magis quam nobili.
adulatores obtrectatoresque: two classes who distort the truth; cf.
the words of Tacitus (H. i 1) describing how the history of the early
emperors was biassed by partizan views: Simul veritas pluribus modis
infracta, primum inscitia rei publicae ut alienae, mox libidine adsentandi
aut rursus odio adversus dominantes: ita neutris cura posteritatis inter
offensos vel obnoxios. Sed ambitionem ("servility'') scriptoris facile
averseris, obtrectatio et livor pronis auribus accipiuntur: quippe adulationi
foedum crimen servitutis, malignitati falsa species libertatis inest.
variatum esset: other examples of the use of the impersonal
passive by Suetonius are Aug. 56, 2, assurrectum ab universis in theatro
et a stantibus plausum: Claud. 11, 1, de mutando rei p. statu haesitatum
erat: Ner. 26, 2, cum lapidibus et subselliorum fragminibus decerneretur: ib. 38, 2, ea clade saevitum est: Oth. 9, 1, plurimum profligari
posse.
§2. extat Q. Elogi.. libellus: the correct reading is quite uncertain.
The MSS. give extatq. elogi (-ii, -ium) and M. Hertz would write this as
extatque elogi (Bentley, extaretque elogi), presumably understanding elogi
libellus to be a genealogical monograph such as was written for the family
of the Junii by Atticus (Nep. Attic. 18, 3; see also on Suet. Galb. 3, 1).
It seems more probable that some proper name should be read: Muretus
suggested "Q. Clodii"; Lipsius "Q. Longini"; Casaubon "Q. Eulogii
(or Eclogii)"; Roth kept to the letters of the MSS. and read "Q. Elogi"
(so Preud'homme; Ihm prints "Q. † Elogi'"). Casaubon's conjecture
"Q. Eulogii" is perhaps more satisfactory than any other; he assumes that
Eulogius was a freedman of Quintus Vitellius and after his manumission
took the name of Q. Vitellius Eulogius; to please his patronus, he drew
up a stemma or family-tree of the Vitellian gens and dedicated the work
to him; in the same way Julius Marathus, a freedman of Augustus,
published records of Augustus (Aug. 79, 2:94, 3). There is no evidence
for "Elogius'' as a name; there are a few instances of "Eulogius" (see
Pauly-Wissowa).
Quintum Vitellium: uncle of the emperor; see c. 2, 2.
Divi Augusti quaestorem: he was probably one of the special
quaestors assigned to the emperor in virtue of his proconsular power; they
were known as quaestores principis, quaestores Caesaris, quaestores Augusti.
These imperial quaestors were employed to read to the senate the letters
and the orationes of the emperor; cf. Tit. 6, 1. Sometimes they are
referred to as quaestores candidati principis, being chosen from, and
usually coextensive with, the candidates for the quaestorship who were
recommended by the emperor and elected as a matter of course.
Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 529. The younger Pliny was an imperial quaestor,
as he mentions in Ep. vii 16, simul quaestores Caesaris (i.e. Domitian)
fuimus.
See
Fauno: Faunus was an old rural divinity, in whose honour the
Faunalia were celebrated by the country people on Dec. 5 (cf. Hor. C. iii
18). His worship was introduced into the city of Rome in 196 в.с. The
Roman annalists seem to have invented the legend that he was a Rex
Aboriginum (Dion. Hal. i 31, ἐτύγχανε δὲ τότε τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν ᾿Αβοριγίνων
παρειληφὼς Φαῦνος), the third amongst the mythical kings of Latium (viz.
Saturnus, Picus, Faunus, Latinus). He was also identified with the Greek
Pan, whose cult was said to have been brought to Rome by the Arcadian
Evander, and Wissowa (Relig. u. Kult. Röm. p. 174) holds that the multiplication of Fauni was due to assimilation to the Pans and Satyrs. As a
prophetic god he was believed to reveal the future by oracles (in Saturnian
verse), dreams, and voices of unknown origin (Aen. vii 81 sqq., Cic. N.D.
ii 2, iii 6, etc.); hence the name Faunus was explained as the "speaker,
foreteller (fari)" by Isidorus, and Nettleship (Essays in Lat. Lit. p. 52)
says "Once imagine Faunus as a 'speaker,' and all becomes clear. He
is not only the composer and reciter of verses, but generally the seer or
wise man, whose superior knowledge entitles him to the admiration and
dread of the country folk who consult him. But as his real nature and
functions are superseded, his character is misconceived: he becomes a
divinity, the earliest king of Latium, the god of prophecy, the god of
agriculture." (Quoted by Warde Fowler, Rom. Fest. p. 259, who examines
critically the various theories with regard to Faunus and his cult.)
Aboriginum: the Aborigines (in Gr., with long penult., ᾿Αβοριγίνες)
who are connected in legend with Aeneas, Latinus, and Evander, were said
to have been the oldest inhabitants of Latium, having been driven down
by the Sabines from the mountain country about Reate. They are first
mentioned in Lycophron's Alexandra (v. 1253) where Cassandra prophesies
that Aeneas will colonize χώραν ἐν τόποις Βορειγόνων (cf. Sall. Cat. 6, Urbem
Romam condidere atque habuere initio Troiani . cumque eis Aborigines).
The traditional derivation of their name is “ab origine,” i.e. original
inhabitants, αὐτόχθονες; some regarded it as a corruption of “aberrigines”
i.e. nomads (Fest. p. 266, Dion. Hal. i 10); others explained it as
"mountain dwellers," connecting it with ὄpos (Dion. Hal. i 13).
Vitellia, quae pro numine coleretur: the worship of a goddess Vitellia
is not mentioned elsewhere. The name Vitellia, like Italia, is from ἰταλός
vitulus (Tusc. vitlu = bos), and would mean "the goddess of calves."
Servius (on Aen. viii 328) gives ‘“Vitalia'' as the old name of Italy, the
land of cattle. A female head, representing the personified Italia, with
the inscription “Italia” or “viteliu" is found on several coins; see
Roscher, Lex. Myth. iii 558 sqq., Eckhel i 103 sqq.
toto Latio imperasse: it is doubtful whether toto Latio is dat. or abl.;
in Ner. 12, 3 all the better MSS. give magistros toto certamini praeposuit
consulares, and the dat. toto occurs in Caes. B.G. vii 89, Hirt. B.G. viii 34,
Prop. iii 11, 57, Ov. Am. iii 3, 41, and other passages collected by Neue-Wagener, Formenlehre ii 529.
inter patricios adlectam: see on Oth. i, 3. The Vitellii were patricii
at Rome at the time of the last Tarquin. Livy (ii 4) mentions two of
the Vitellii as leaders of the "nobiles adulescentes” who conspired to
restore Tarquin; the plot failed, and they paid the penalty. Livy also
mentions a sister of these Vitellii who was married to the consul Brutus;
two of their sons were implicated in the conspiracy and were executed
by order of their father Brutus. Plutarch (Poplic. 3), in his account of
this plot, describes the Οὐιτέλλιοι as patricians (καλοὶ κἀγαθοί) and senators
(βουλευταί). The patrician family of the Vitellii may have become extinct
at that time, as we do not hear of them again under the Republic.
§3. viam Vitelliam: there is no other reference to this road.
Witzschel would identify it with the via Ianiculensis as a name for the
beginning of the via Aurelia (see Galb. 20, 2) which ran from the Porta
Ianiculensis.
Ianiculo: a long and almost continuous hill on the right bank of
the Tiber, east of Rome and outside the limits of the city.
coloniam eiusdem nominis: Vitellia was a town on the borders of
Latium and the territory of the Aequi. Its name occurs in Liv. ii 39
among the towns captured by Coriolanus (c. 490 в.с.). In Liv. v 29 it is
mentioned as a colonia Romana founded in the territory of the Aequi,
which was taken in a surprise night attack by the Aequi in 393 в.с.; we
are not told whether the Romans recovered it. Livy does not state directly
when it was founded, but in v 24 he mentions the foundation of a colony
of 3000 Roman citizens in the territory of the Volsci in 395 B.с., which
(if "Volsci" is used in its broader sense including "Aequi'") may be
Vitellia, as Niebuhr and Mommsen conjectured; see Weissenborn ad loc.
Pliny (N.H. iii 69) includes Vitellia among the cities of Latium which
were utterly extinct in his time.
gentili copia tutandam: there is no historical evidence of the
truth of this family tradition.
The most famous example of a family
furnishing a military force is that of the Fabii who asked the senate to
be allowed to conduct the war against Veii (Liv. ii 48). In 479 B.c. the
Fabii marched from Rome and founded a fortified post on the Cremera,
but two years later the whole Fabian gens (save one survivor) were
slaughtered by the Veientes.
Aequiculos: the Aequiculi, or Aequi, were mountain dwellers in
central Italy between the Latins, Marsi, and Hernici, in the valley of the
upper Anio and on the western shore of the Fucine lake. Their rugged
land bred hardy warriors; cf. Aen. vii 746 (describing the warrior Ufens),
Horrida praecipue cui gens adsuetaque multo | venatu nemorum, duris
Aequicula glebis: Ov. F. iii 93, Aequiculus asper ("rugged''): Sil. Ital.
viii 368, quique Anienis habent ripas, gelidoque rigantur | Simbruvio,
rastrisque domant Aequicula rura. The Aequi (and Volsci) were constantly
at war with Rome, their power being greatest in the first half of the fifth
cent. B.C. In 389 they were defeated by Camillus, and in 304 they were
completely subjugated, forty of their towns being captured in fifty days
(Diod. Sic. xx 101, Liv. ix 45); the vanquished were granted the civitas
sine suffragio (Cic. Off. i 35).
tempore Samnitici belli: this was the second of Rome's three Samnite
wars: (1) 343-341 в.с., (2) 327-304, (3) 298-290.
subsedisse: 'settled at"; cf. Vesp. 1, 4, subsedisse in oppido Reatino:
Cic. Fam. vi 8, in Sicilia ut subsidas.
Nuceriae: one of the principal cities of Apulia. It is better known
as Luceria, and is to be distinguished from the cities in Campania and
Umbria which bore the name of Nuceria. In Ptol. iii 1 it is called Νουκερία
᾿Απουλῶν, and in App. B.C. ii 38 simply Νουκερία; Livy, Strabo, and
Diodorus call it Luceria, Λουκερία (mod. Lucera); cf. Tac. H. iii 86, Patria
illi (i.e. the emperor Vitellius) Luceria. In the second Samnite war, while
the other Apulian cities broke the alliance which they had made with Rome
in 326, Luceria remained loyal and was besieged by the Samnites. In the
attempt to relieve it the Roman army suffered humiliation at the Caudine
Forks (321), and Luceria fell, but was recovered by the Romans in the
following year (Liv. ix 12-15). In 314 it was betrayed into the hands
of the Samnites, but once again the Romans made themselves masters of
it, slaughtering most of the inhabitants and replacing them by 2500 Roman
colonists (Liv. ix 26, Vell. Pat. i 14, Diod. Sic. xix 72).
CHAPTER 2.
Cassius Severus: notorious as a defamatory writer under Augustus
and Tiberius. Tacitus (A. iv 21) describes him as “sordidae originis,
maleficae vitae, sed orandi validus.” He was banished to Crete by
Augustus "commotus Cassii Severi libidine, qua viros feminasque inlustres
procacibus scriptis diffamaverat” (Tac. A. i 72); later, under Tiberius,
as he continued his attacks, he was removed to Seriphos where he died
in 34 A.D. after 25 years of exile. His writings were suppressed by
decree of the senate, but Caligula allowed them to be circulated again
(Suet. Calig. 16). He introduced a new style of oratory, bitter and
abusive (Tac. Dial. 26); Quintilian (x 1, 116) says of him: ingenii
plurimum est in eo et acerbitas mira et urbanitas ("wit") et fervor;
sed plus stomacho quam consilio dedit.
sutorem veteramentarium: a cobbler, repairer of old shoes. The
adj. veteramentarius seems to occur only here; it corresponds to the Gr.
παλαιουργός “cobbler” (Poll. vii 82); "sutor cerdo" was also used in
this sense (Mart. iii 16 and 59). These cobblers were distinct from the
various classes of shoemakers (e.g. calcearius, solearius, sandaliarius,
crepidarius, caligarius); see Marquardt, Privatl.2 596 sq.
=
sectionibus:
auctionibus bonorum publicatorum, auction sales of
confiscated goods; cf. Tac. H. i 90, Neronianae sectiones: id. A. xiii 23
(quoted below on “cognituris''): Cic. Phil. ii '64, illud scelus sectionis:
Caes. B.G. ii 33, sectionem eius oppidi universam Caesar vendidit. So
"sector'" was used for a purchaser at such sales; cf. Gaius iv 146,
sectores vocantur qui publica bona mercantur. The derivation from
secare (not sequi) is confirmed by Cicero's jest in Rosc. Amer. 80, sectores
bonorum et collorum. Rejecting the theory that sectores were so called
from "cutting up" the property to resell it, Mommsen explains their
name as "cutters off," referring to the deduction (sometimes very large)
from the price of a property in consideration of the debts and liabilities
attaching to it. See Halm, Introd. to Cic. Rosc. Amer. p. 4; Mayor on
Cic. Phil. ii 39.
=
cognituris: cognitor was used of one who appeared in place of
another or represented his interests in court, and so cognitura munus
defensoris in iudicio (cf. Gaius iv 124). In relation to the State a
cognitor was one who represented and defended the interests of the
State, especially the Treasury, not merely by informing about debts due
to the Treasury, but also by buying such debts from the Treasury as a
speculation, and then recovering them from the debtors. The conjunction
of sectiones and cogniturae in our passage is illustrated by Tac. A. xiii 23,
where Paetus “exercendis apud aerarium sectionibus famosus” is
sentenced to exile, and the records, by which he was reviving forgotten
debts due to the Treasury, were burnt (tabulae exustae sunt, quibus oblitterata aerarii nomina retrahebat). Cf. also Manil. v 319, non illo coram
digitos (i.e. "bidders'") quaesiverit hasta ("auction"), | defueritque
bonis sector, poenamque lucretur | noxius, et patriam fraudarit debitor
aeris; | cognitor est urbis.
=
muliere vulgari:
meretrice; cf. Ov. F. iv 865, numina vulgares
Veneris celebrate puellae: Suet. Dom. 22, inter vulgatissimas meretrices
(where Baumg.-Cr. would read vulgarissimas); in Cic. Phil. ii 18, 44
Antonius is called "vulgare scortum.”
Antiochi: not mentioned elsewhere.
furnariam exercentis: furnaria (post-class.) sc. ars et negotiatio;
cf. Plin. N.H. vii 135, castrensis furnaria "a camp bakery." The word
furnus denoted especially a baker's oven (see Daremberg-Saglio, ii
1420); hence panis furnaceus, bread baked in an oven, as distinct from
panis subcinericius, p. testicius, p. clibanicius. Wolf (followed by
Baumg.-Cr.) strangely explains furnariam exercere as meaning “ex furnis
vulgo locandis quaestum facere, ut moris erat Romae"; but, as Hofstee
points out, this view rests apparently on a doubtful inference from
Juv. vii 4, balneolum Gabiis, Romae conducere furnos. The enemies of
Augustus, like those of Vitellius, gave a disparaging account of his
ancestors, and said that his great-grandfather had carried on a bakery
(pistrinum exercuisse) at Aricia; see Aug. 4.
quod discrepat: cf. Liv. ix 46 id, quod haud discrepat: Claudius'
speech "de iure honorum,” col. i 1. 16, nam et hoc inter auctores discrepat.
The impers. use of "discrepat" (opp. "convenit") also occurs in Suet.
Claud. 44, 2, veneno occisum convenit; ubi autem et per quem dato, discrepat; this is frequent in Livy, e.g. iii 31, cum de legibus conveniret, de
latore tantum discreparet.
sit in medio: cf. in medio relinquere, "to leave it to every man's
judgment, leave it an open question," Cic. Cael. 20, 48, Sall. Cat. 19, 8.
Tacitus has in medium relinquere (cf. θεῖναι εἰς μέσον), Germ. 46, quod ego
ut incompertum in medium (medio, Halm) relinquam.
§ 2. ceterum: like the Gr. δ' οὖν, marking the return from a digression;
cf. Liv. xxxviii 55, ceterum ad hunc nimis aequum aut iniquum praetorem
reus extemplo factus L. Scipio.
P. Vitellius: Dessau (Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 453) suggests that there
may be a mistake in the praenomen (“Publius'' instead of "Aulus") as
his eldest son was called "Aulus" and only his third son "Publius."
domo Nuceria: abl. of origin, "whose home was Nuceria," Nuceria
being in app. with domo; cf. Aen. x 183, Qui Caerete (abl. of Caere) domo
sunt. A common phrase in asking a person's native place was "unde
domo?" lit. "whence from home?” “from what home?" e.g. Aen. viii
114, Qui genus? unde domo? (Conington, however, citing Plaut. Cist. iv 1, 6,
haec cistella numnam hinc ab nobis domo est?, says the abl. means “in
respect of domicile'"). For Nuceria see on c. 1, 3.
pudendis parentibus: cf. Hor. C. ii 4, 20, crede non illam potuisse
nasci Matre pudenda.
rerum Augusti procurator: Hirschfeld (Kais. Verwaltungsb., 3 sqq.)
shows that apparently under the early Empire the official expression for
the emperor's income was res Caesaris or res familiaris Caesaris; it is
from the time of Claudius that we find the term fiscus or fiscus Caesaris
definitely used in contrast to aerarium (see on Vesp. 16, 3); the imperial
revenues previously grouped as res or res familiaris (-es) of the emperor
were now divided into fiscus and patrimonium, the emperor's public and
private income, and a procurator patrimonii was appointed; under Septimius
Severus the patrimonium as crown property was divided from the patrimonium privatum (called res privata), the emperor's personal property,
and a procuratio rerum privatarum was established as distinct from the
procuratio patrimonii principis. See Mattingly, Imp. Civ. Serv. p. 14 sqq.
amplissimae dignitatis: though the father was only an eques, the sons
filled curule offices (which are called “amplissimi honores,” Iul. 72,
Ner. 3, 2, etc.) and so gained admission to the senate ("amplissimus ordo,”
Calig. 49, 1: Oth. 8, 1: Vesp. 2, 3).
cognomines: bearing the same nomen (gentilicium) of "Vitellius."
See on Oth. 1, 3. The cognomen is not found in the case of the Vitellii,
only the praenomen and nomen.
in consulatu obiit: in 32 A.D. he was consul suffectus from the Kalends
of July (C.I.L. i² p. 71, x 1233).
Domitio: i.e. Domitius Ahenobarbus (see on Oth. 2, 1).
..
quem inierat: strictly speaking, the expression ‘“consulatum cum
Domitio inierat could only be used of Camillus Scribonianus (Oth. 2, 1)
who was consul for the first half of the year 32 A.D. along with Domitius;
cf. Tac. A. vi 1, Cn. Domitius et Camillus Scribonianus consulatum inierant.
Suetonius (if not guilty of an inaccuracy) uses it loosely of A. Vitellius,
meaning that when he entered on office as consul suffectus his colleague
(the existing consul) was Domitius. Being related to the house of Caesar,
Domitius was allowed to hold the consulship for the whole year, and so
was an exception to Tiberius' practice of appointing as many successive
consuls as he pleased each year (Dio lviii 20).
praelautus: the MSS. have praelatus, but praelautus was correctly read
in the Basle ed. of 1533. Cf. Ner. 30, 1, sordidos ac deparcos esse putabat
quibus ratio impensarum constaret ("who could balance their accounts'');
praelautos, vereque magnificos, qui abuterentur ac perderent. This compound is not cited from any other author. For other adjs. strengthened
by prae- which are used by Suetonius see on Galb. 21.
alioqui: "in other respects” (τὰ μὲν ἄλλα); cf. Tib. 71, sermone Graeco
quamquam alioqui promptus et facilis, non tamen usque quaque usus est
abstinuitque maxime in senatu. It is a post-Aug. word and is used also
in the sense of "besides" (praeterea), and "otherwise" "in the opposite
case"; see Peterson, Introd. to Quintil. x, p. li. Cicero uses ceteroqui “in
other respects."
Quintus: see c. 1, 2, where he is described as “Divi Augusti quaestor.”
If Hirschfeld is right in his ingenious restoration of Q. Vitellii in Tac. A. i
10 († que tedii † et Vedii Pollionis luxus), Augustus was censured by some
for having such a luxurious spendthrift as a friend. He is mentioned
among the senators impoverished by extravagance, whom Tiberius in virtue
of his censorial powers expelled from the senate or allowed to resign; Tac.
A. ii 48, prodigos et ob flagitia egentes, Vibidium Varronem, Marium
Nepotem, Appium Appianum, Cornelium Sullam, Q. Vitellium movit senatu
aut sponte cedere passus est. Dio (li 22) refers to a certain Quintus
Vitellius who, though a senator, fought as a gladiator at games given by
Augustus in 29 B.c.; he was probably an uncle of the Q. Vitellius mentioned
here.
caruit ordine: this unusual phrase, instead of motus est ordine senatorio
or senatu, suggests that Q. Vitellius may have been one of those whom
Tiberius allowed “sponte cedere senatu.” The simple ordo is used in
the sense of ordo senatorius; cf. Tac. A. xiii 11, Lateranum ordine demotum
reddidit senatui.
auctore Tiberio: cf. Vesp. 11, auctor senatui fuit decernendi (where
see note): Oth. 8, 1, auctor senatui fuit mittendae legationis: Dom. 8, 2,
auctor tribunis plebis fuit aedilem .. accusandi.
§3. Publius: P. Vitellius served as legatus of Germanicus in Germany
and in 15 A.D. amid great difficulties succeeded in leading back in safety
the 2nd and 14th legions from the attack on the Chatti and other German
tribes (Tac. A. i 70). In the next year he was sent to take the census of
the Gauls (A. ii 6). He accompanied Germanicus to the East and was
proconsul of Bithynia in 18 A.D. On the death (attributed to poison) of
Germanicus in Syria in 19, Vitellius was one of those who aided in the
prosecution of Cn. Piso as the author of his death. Tacitus (A. iii 13)
says that Vitellius spoke "multa eloquentia.” Piso slew himself before
the investigation by the senate was finished; some maintained that he
was slain by an emissary of Tiberius, who feared the revelations which Piso
might make of the emperor's machinations against Germanicus. The
accusers of Piso, including Vitellius, were rewarded with a sacerdotium by
the senate on the proposal of Tiberius (A. iii 19).
Germanici: Germanicus was son of Nero Claudius Drusus and brother
of the emperor Claudius. He was adopted by his uncle Tiberius, who
afterwards became madly jealous of his popularity and military success.
Among his children were the emperor Gaius Caligula and Agrippina the
mother of the emperor Nero.
Cn. Pisonem: consul in 7 B.C., along with Tiberius the future emperor;
sent by Augustus as legatus to Hispania Tarraconensis, where he incurred
the hatred of the provincials; appointed by Tiberius as governor of Syria.
in 18 A.D. with secret instructions to thwart in every way the plans of
Germanicus who had been given the command of all the eastern provinces
(Tac. A. ii 43 sqq.).
inimicum: the bitter relations between Piso and Germanicus are
described by Tacitus. When Germanicus suspected that Piso was slowly
poisoning him, he sent him a letter in which he formally renounced his
friendship (amicitiam ei renuntiabat, Tac. ii 70).
interfectorem: it is doubtful whether Piso did poison Germanicus:
Tacitus (iii 14) admits that the evidence was in no way conclusive; but,
rightly or wrongly, the people were convinced of his guilt (cf. Suet. Tib. 52,.
Calig. 2 sq.; Dio lvii 18; Joseph. Ant. Iud. xviii 2, 5).
condemnavit: "secured the condemnation of." For condemnare used.
of a prosecutor cf. Tib. 8, Caepionem. reum maiestatis apud iudices fecit
et condemnavit: Plaut. Most. 1098, apud iudicem hunc argenti condemnabo:
Cic. Div. in Caec. 10, 30; id. Verr. ii 5, 69, 177, etc.
post praeturae honorem: Suetonius is inaccurate here in saying that
the arrest of P. Vitellius in 31 A.D. followed his praetorship, for he must
have been praetor before 14 A.D., as he is mentioned as proconsul of
Bithynia (18 A.D.) on a coin of Germanicus (Eckhel, ii p. 400). See Prosop.
Imp. Rom. iii 453.
inter Seiani conscios arreptus: in 31 A.D.; cf. Tac. A. v 8 where we
are told the precise charge that was made against him: Relatum inde de
P. Vitellio
illum indices ("informers'') arguebant claustra (“keys'")
aerarii (sc. militaris), cui praefectus erat, et militarem pecuniam rebus
novis obtulisse. The notorious Aelius Sejanus succeeded his father as
prefect of the praetorian guard in the reign of Tiberius with whom he
became all-powerful. Ambitious of empire, he contrived to remove the
members of the imperial house who stood in his path. At length Tiberius
became suspicious of his designs and sent a letter from Capreae (where
he was living in seclusion) to the senate denouncing Sejanus as a danger
to the State. The senate decreed his death, which was carried out at once,
his body being dragged through the streets and flung into the Tiber.
Juvenal (x 56 sqq.) cites Sejanus as an instance of the vanity of human
ambitions.
in custodiam fratri datus: as was done also in the case of Pomponius
Secundus who was accused along with P. Vitellius; Tac. (l.c.), neque aliud
periclitantibus auxilii quam in fratrum constantia fuit, qui vades exstitere
(i.e. gave surety and undertook their custody, till their appeal should be
heard by Caesar; see Furneaux ad loc.). The custodia mentioned by
Suetonius is that known as libera custodia by which accused persons instead of being kept in prison were held by the consuls or other magistrates
in their own houses, or consigned to relatives or others who became responsible as securities for their safe-keeping; cf. Sall. Cat. 47; Cic. Verr. v 29,
73; Liv. xxiv 45; Vell. Pat. i 11; Ulp. Dig. xlviii 3, 1; Dio lviii 3, 5.
The brother to whose safe-keeping Publius Vitellius was entrusted was
probably Aulus.
scalpro librario venas
incidit: cf. Tac. (l.c.): mox crebris prolationibus ("postponements") spem ac metum iuxta gravatus Vitellius
petito per speciem studiorum scalpro levem ictum venis intulit vitamque
aegritudine animi finivit (these words of Tac. seem naturally to imply
that the self-inflicted wound caused his death; if so, Tac. differs from
Suet.). The scalprum librarium was a pen-knife used by writers in cutting
and shaping the calamus. P. Vitellius edited his speech against Piso (cf.
Plin. N.H. xi 187; Teuffel-Schwabe, Röm. Lit. 276, 4).
§ 4. Lucius Syriae praepositus: Lucius Vitellius was consul in
34 A.D., and in the following year Tiberius appointed him proconsul of
Syria and gave to him the general control of the campaign against the
Parthians (Tac. A. vi 32, cunctis quae apud orientem parabantur L. Vitellium
praefecit). For such extraordinary commands (imperia) which raised the
holder over the governors of other provinces see Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 853.
Tacitus (l.c.) praises L. Vitellius highly as a provincial governor:
regendis provinciis prisca virtute egit; cf. Dio lix 27, ὁ δ᾽ οὖν Οὐιτέλλιος
ὁ Λούκιος οὔτ᾽ ἀγεννὴς οὔτ᾽ ἄφρων ὤν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐκ τῆς ἐν τῇ Συρίᾳ ἀρχῆς ὀνομαστὸς
γενόμενος, τά τε γὰρ ἄλλα λαμπρῶς ἡγεμόνευσε, καὶ τὸν ᾿Αρτάβανον . . κατέπληξε
ἀπαντήσας αὐτῷ ἐξαπιναίως περὶ τὸν Εὐφράτην ἤδη ὄντι, κ.τ.λ.
in
Artabanum: Artabanus III was a descendant of the Arsacidae on his
mother's side, and in 16 A.D. he supplanted Vonones as king of Parthia.
In 35 A.D. Artabanus tried to make his son king of Armenia, and sent insulting letters to Tiberius at Rome. Tiberius thereupon appointed
Mithridates to be king of Armenia, and Tiridates to be king of Parthia.
To enforce these arrangements, Tiberius conferred on L. Vitellius, governor
of Syria, the same large powers in the East as he had previously conferred
on Germanicus. Vitellius established Tiridates, but in the following
year when Vitellius had withdrawn his forces, the Parthians recalled
Artabanus, and Tiridates had to flee into Syria. Vitellius again advanced
against Artabanus, but an agreement was entered into by which Artabanus
recognised Mithridates as king of Armenia, while the Romans discontinued
their support of Tiridates. Artabanus also paid homage as Suetonius
describes, and sent his son Darius as a hostage to Rome (Tac. A. vi 31-37,
41-44; Dio lviii 26; Joseph. Ant. Iud. xviii 4, 5).
conloquium: Dio (lix 27) and Suetonius (Calig. 14) say that this
conference took place in the reign of Caligula, but Josephus (l.c.) puts it
in the reign of Tiberius. Schiller (Gesch. röm. Kaiserz. i 278, n. 2)
proposes to reconcile these statements by assuming that negotiations began
in the last months of Tiberius (ob. 37 A.D.) and were concluded at the
beginning of the reign of his successor Caligula.
ad veneranda legionum signa: in the principia (see Oth. 1, 2, n.) of
a Roman camp there was a portable shrine in which were kept the standards
and the images of the emperors; medallion portraits of the emperors were
also affixed to the standards. For the sanctity of the standards cf. Tac.
A. i 39, illic signa et aquilam amplexus religione sese tutabatur: A. xv 16,
iure iurando Paeti cautum apud signa: Liv. xxvi 48, obstringere periurio
non se solum suumque caput, sed signa militaria et aquilas sacramentique
religionem. Dio (l.c.) says that Artabanus made offerings to the images
of Augustus and Caligula: ἔς τε λόγους (conloquium) αὐτὸν ὑπηγάγετο (pellexit)
καὶ θῦσαι ταῖς τοῦ Αὐγούστου τοῦ τε Γαΐου εἰκόσιν ἠνάγκασε, σπονδάς τε αὐτῷ πρὸς
τὸ τῶν Ῥωμαίων σύμφορον δοὺς καὶ προσέτι καὶ παῖδας αὐτοῦ ὁμήρους λαβών.
..
duos insuper consulatus: in 43 and 47 A.D.; he had been consul
earlier under Tiberius in 34. Eutropius (vii 18) says of the emperor
Vitellius: pater eius non admodum clare natus tres tamen ordinarios gesserat
consulatus. For “ordinarios” see on Dom. 2, 1.
censuram: L. Vitellius was censor along with the emperor Claudius
in 47-48 A.D.; cf. Tac. A. xii 4, Silanus repente per edictum Vitellii
ordine senatorio movetur: A. xi 13, Claudius munia censoria usurpans
theatralem populi lasciviam severis edictis increpuit: Suet. Claud. 16, 1,
gessit et censuram intermissam diu post Plancum Paulumque censores (in
22 B.C.). For the censorship under the Empire see Mommsen Staatsr. ii³
336 sqq. Vespasian and Titus held it in 73-74 (Tit. 6, 1), and Domitian
assumed it for life in 84 (Dom. 8, 3).
curam imperii sustinuit: cf. Plut. Galb. 22, where L. Vitellius is
described as τιμητής (censor) καὶ τρὶς ὕπατος (consul) γενόμενος καὶ Κλαυδίῳ
Καίσαρι τρόπον τινα συνάρξας (consors imperii). Mommsen (op. cit. ii³ 1114)
gives other examples of persons entrusted with the “cura imperii" during
the absence of the emperor from Rome, viz. Maecenas under Augustus,
Seneca under Nero, Mucianus under Vespasian. These all occupied a
position for which there is no official title and no formal recognition under
the constitution of the principate; it was a personal appointment of the
emperor. Mommsen also corrects the statement in Dio lx 21 (of the
events in 43 A.D.), ὁ Κλαύδιος τὰ μὲν οἴκοι τῷ Οὐιτελλίῳ τῷ συνάρχοντι (i.e. joint
consul) τά τε ἄλλα καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐνεχείρισε· καὶ γὰρ ἐξ ἴσου αὐτὸν ἑαυτῷ
ἑξάμηνον ὅλον ὑπατεῦσαι ἐποίησεν. Dio's attempt to connect the appointment
of Vitellius as deputy of Claudius with his position as consul breaks down
because both Claudius and Vitellius had laid down their consulships before
March 1, 43 A.D., and the emperor did not leave Rome for Britain till
the latter part of that year.
expeditione Britannica: for the expedition sent under A. Plautius to
Britain see notes on Vesp. 4, 1.
innocens: honest" "disinterested"; cf. Sall. Cat. 54, cum strenuo
virtute, cum modesto pudore, cum innocente abstinentia certabat: Cic.
..
Verr. i 4, 12, Sicilia, quam iste per triennium ita vastavit vexavit ac perdidit, ut vix per multos annos innocentesque praetores aliqua ex parte
recreari aliquando posse videatur: Plin. Pan. 28, 3, quodque (sc. congiarium)
antea principes, ad odium sui leniendum, tumentibus plebis animis obiectabant, id tu tam innocens populo dedisti, quam populus accepit. The subst.
innocentia is used in the same way for probity in money matters in c. 5
infr.; the “iustitia et aequitas et innocentia” of Aristides are mentioned
in Nep. Arist. 2.
amore
perinfamis: Tacitus (A. vi 32) refers to the unsavoury
reputation of L. Vitellius at Rome: eo de homine haud sum ignarus
sinistram in urbe famam, pleraque foeda memorari, ceterum <in > regendis
provinciis prisca virtute egit. The compound perinfamis occurs again in
Apul. Met. iii 16 where it takes the 'gen.: publicitus maleficae disciplinae
perinfames sumus. Other adjs. with intensive per- in Suet. are percivilis,
peridoneus, permodicus, perparvus, perpauci, persenex; also the advs.
perindigne, persaepe, persancte.
arterias: arteria meant the "windpipe," and as this divides at the
base into the two bronchial tubes, the pl. arteriae was also used (so in
Gr., ἀρτηρία and ἀρτηρίαι): cf. Ner. 25, 3, ut conservandae vocis gratia
neque milites umquam, nisi absens aut alio verba pronuntiante, appellaret
neque quicquam serio iocoque egerit, nisi astante phonasco (“a voicetrainer'') qui moneret parceret arteriis ac sudarium ("handkerchief'') ad
os applicaret.
fauces: 'throat"; often joined with arteria (-ae), e.g. Pallad. ii 15,
19, ut ex eo (melle) facta potio arterias curet et fauces.
pro remedio: cf. Ner. 35, 5, Burro praefecto remedium ad fauces
pollicitus toxicum misit.
fovebat: fovere, which is used very freely of medical applications,
here means to gargle or to soothe an irritated throat; cf. Novius, Atell.
109, fauces fovi (= gargarissavi): Fronto, p. 69, 14 N., aqua mulsa sorbenda
usque ad gulam et reiectanda fauces fovi potius quam dicerem gargarissavi: Verg. G. ii 135, animas (“breath'") et olentia Medi | ora fovent illo
(flore) et senibus medicantur anhelis. The disgusting practice of Vitellius,
which Suetonius describes here, may be referred to in Tac. A. xi 3 where
Asiaticus, accused by Vitellius, speaks of the "os impudicum” of his
accuser.
§5. miri in adulando ingenii: cf. Tac. A. vi 32, unde (i.e. from Syria)
regressus et formidine Gai Caesaris (i.e. Caligula), familiaritate Claudii
turpe in servitium mutatus exemplar apud posteros adulatorii dedecoris
habetur, cesseruntque prima postremis et bona iuventae senectus flagitiosa
oblitteravit: Dio lix 27, Οὐιτέλλιος .. πάντας . . τοὺς ἄλλους κολακείᾳ ὑπερεβάλετο. Dio tells how on one occasion Caligula claimed to be enjoying
converse with the Moon, and asked Vitellius if he could see the goddess
with him; Vitellius with downcast eyes replied in awe-struck accents:
"Only you gods, master, may behold one another."
reversus ex Syria: Caligula, jealous of the success of L. Vitellius
against Artabanus, and fearing that he might aspire to empire, recalled
him in 40 A.D. to put him to death. Vitellius managed to save his life by
throwing himself at the emperor's feet with tears and lamentations, calling
him by many divine titles and paying him worship, and by promising that
if he were spared he would offer sacrifice to him. Caligula not merely
granted him his life, but admitted him among his most intimate friends
(Dio l.c.).
capite velato: the Greeks worshipped "capite aperto," but the Romans
(except at the rites of Saturn) "capite velato (operto)," a custom said
to be derived from Aeneas; cf. Aen. iii 405, purpureo velare (imper.) comas
adopertus amictu, | ne qua inter sanctos ignes in honore deorum | hostilis
facies occurrat et omina turbet. Plutarch (Quaest. Rom. x sq.) suggests
various explanations: (1) it is a sign of humility, (2) it prevents the
hearing of ill-omened words, (3) it signifies that the soul which worships
is covered and concealed in the body. See the discussion in Daremberg-Saglio, iv 977; Rose on Plut. l.c.
circumvertens se, deinde procumbens: the Roman worshipper did not
approach the image of the god directly, but advanced to the left of it and
after prayer turned to the right and fell down before it in adoration; see
Munro on Lucr. v 1198, nec pietas ullast velatum saepe videri | vertier ad
lapidem atque omnes accedere ad aras, | nec procumbere humi prostratum,
etc. The custom is often referred to; e.g. Plaut. Curc. 69, quo me vortam
nescio. Si deos salutas, dextrovorsum censeo: Liv. v 21, convertentem
se inter hanc venerationem traditur memoriae prolapsum cecidisse,
idque ómen pertinuisse postea eventu rem coniectantibus visum ad
damnationem ipsius Camilli: Plin. N.H. xxviii 25, in adorando totum
corpus circumagimus, quod in laevum fecisse Galliae religiosius credunt (in
the temple of Aesculapius at Rome they also turned to the left, C. I. G.
5980); Val. Fl. Arg. viii 246, precari Incipiunt . . dextrum pariter vertuntur
in orbem. Plutarch (Num. 14) attempts several explanations of Numa's
religious ordinance “ τὸ προσκυνεῖν περιστρεφομένους.”
Claudium uxoribus libertisque addictum: cf. Claud. 29, His (libertis)
uxoribusque addictus non principem sed ministrum egit, compendio
("according to the interest of'") cuiusque horum vel etiam studio aut
libidine honores exercitus impunitates supplicia largitus est, et quidem
insciens plerumque et ignarus: ib. 25, Sed et haec et cetera totumque adeo
ex parte magna principatum non tam suo quam uxorum libertorumque
arbitrio administravit, talis ubique plerumque qualem esse eum aut expediret
illis aut liberet. Claudius, who had previously divorced two wives (Plautia
Urgulanilla and Aelia Paetina), was at the time of his accession (41 A.D.)
married to the infamous Valeria Messalina. She was put to death in 48
for publicly marrying a handsome Roman youth C. Silius while Claudius
was away at Ostia (Tac. A. xi 26-38). After her downfall he married
his niece Agrippina (see on Galb. 5, 1), who poisoned him in 54. For the
influence of Messalina cf. [Sen.] Octavia 950, rexit principis aulam cara
marito partuque (her son Britannicus) potens. Tacitus (A. xii 7) describes
the domination of Agrippina: Versa ex eo civitas, et cuncta feminae
oboediebant, non per lasciviam, ut Messalina, rebus Romanis illudenti;
adductum (‘stringent") et quasi virile servitium: palam severitas ac
saepius superbia; nihil domi inpudicum, nisi dominationi expediret.
Suetonius (Claud. 28) enumerates the freedmen who controlled the emperor:
the eunuch Posides, Felix, Harpocras, Polybius his literary adviser (a
studiis), and especially Narcissus his secretary (ab epistulis) and Pallas
his treasurer (a rationibus).
For ‘addictus" "a slave to" (properly of a bondsman debtor) cf.
Prop. iii 11, 1, Quid mirare, meam si versat femina vitam | Et trahit
addictum sub sua iura virum?: Amm. Marc. xxi 16, 16, addictus uxoribus
et palatinis: Suet. Calig. 55, 2, prasinae factioni ita addictus et deditus:
Tib. 69, addictus mathematicae ("astrology'').
ne qua non arte demereretur: cf. Vesp. 2, 3, Gaium ne quo non genere
demereretur: Oth. 4, 2, alium alia via militem demerebatur: Claud. 40, 3,
nihil habere se, quare eos demereatur. Suetonius also uses the form
"demereo," Aug. 8, 1, avunculum magno opere demeruit. In this sense
(= aliquem sibi obligare, devincire) the verb is not found earlier than
Ovid and Livy.
pro maximo munere: "as a supreme favour." Ihm adopts the reading
proximo munere (MGLP), but this yields no satisfactory sense ("at the
next gladiatorial spectacle''?). Iac. Gronovius proposed pro suтто.
a Messalina petit: the intimacy of Messalina and Vitellius is seen in
Tac. A. xi 2 sq., where she uses her influence with him to secure the condemnation of Asiaticus in 47 A.D., when Vitellius (who was consul and
censor with Claudius in that year) was sitting as assessor with the emperor
at that trial. For petit = petiit cf. Oth. 7, 1.
excalciandos: see on Vesp. 8, 3. Ovid (A.A. ii 211) describes the lover,
like a slave, removing or putting on the shoes of his mistress: Nec dubita
tereti scamnum producere lecto, | et tenero soleam deme, vel adde, pedi.
socculum: a shoe or slipper worn by women, which fitted the heel
but left the instep open; it was often adorned with gold and pearls
(Sen. Ben. ii 12, Plin. N.H. ix 114). The soccus muliebris affected by
Caligula (Calig. 52) was a socculus of this kind. See Daremberg-Saglio iv
1366 for probable illustrations of socculi.
tunicas: two tunicae were regularly worn, the inner shirt being called
tunica interior or subucula; cf. Varr. ap. Non. 542, 24, Posteaquam binas
tunicas habere coeperunt, instituerunt vocare subuculam et indusium.
Augustus in winter wore four tunicae besides a subucula and a thorax
laneus or “chest protector” (Aug. 82). See Marquardt, Privatl.2 552.
gestavit assidue: this expression shows the way in which so-called
"frequentative" verbs like gestare had lost their special meaning. See
App. I. § 7. b.
osculabundus: a verbal adj. found first here and later in Apul. Met. xi
6, Apol. 94, where it takes the acc. (cf. Suet. Tib. 65, 2, speculabundus
signa; Draeger, Hist. Synt. i² 357). Similar adjs. used by Suetonius are
errabundus (Iul. 31, 2), gratulabundus (Galb. 19, 2), indignabundus (Aug.
40, 5, Calig. 35, 3), ludibundus (Ner. 26, 1), venerabundus (Calig. 15, 1).
Narcissi: for this freedman and secretary of Claudius see on Vesp. 4, 1,
Tit. 2.
Pallantis: another freedman, who was treasurer of Claudius and
exercised an immense influence during his reign, especially when Agrippina,
aided by his support, became the wife of the emperor in 50 A.D. He was
deposed from office by Nero in 55 and died in 62, having been poisoned
by order of Nero who was covetous of his enormous wealth. His intolerable arrogance is described in Tac. A. xii 53; Plin. Εp. vii 29.
inter Lares coluit: see on Dom. 17, 2.
Saepe facias!: the same expression occurs in a birthday wish in
Censorin. De die natali c. 2, Nunc quoniam liber de die natali inscribitur,
a votis auspicia sumantur. Itaque “hunc diem,” quod ait Persius,
“numera meliore lapillo,” idque quam saepissime facias exopto.
saeculares ludos: celebrated by Claudius in 47 A.D. An interval of 100
or 110 years was supposed to elapse between successive celebrations. See
on Dom. 4, 3.
؟
CHAPTER 3.
paralysi: cf. Celsus iii 27, Resolutio (= παράλυσις) nervorum frequens
ubique morbus est. Sed interdum tota corpora, interdum partes infestat.
Veteres auctores illud ἀποπληξίαν, hoc παράλυσιν nominaverunt.
utrumque παράλυσιν appellari video.
Nunc
altero die quam: for the omission of post before quam cf. Liv. xxxi 14,
altero die quam a Brundusio soluit in Macedoniam traiecit: Suet. Claud.
17, 2, sexto quam profectus erat mense: Iul. 35, 2, intra quintum quam
affuerat diem: Tib. 60, in paucis diebus quam Capreas attigit. See KühnerStegmann, i 405.
..
duobus filiis: Aulus (the emperor) and Lucius (see on c. 15, 2).
Sextilia probatissima femina: praised by Tacitus also, H. ii 64,
Galéria imperatoris (i.e. Vitellius) uxor.. et pari probitate mater Vitelliorum
Sextilia, antiqui moris. She was spared and cared for by Otho at Rome,
even after her son had revolted against him (Plut. Oth. 5, 16). When he
entered Rome in triumph, Vitellius honoured her with the title of Augusta
(Тас. Н. ii 89). She died, old and feeble, a few days before the overthrow
of Vitellius, having gained nothing from his imperial dignity but sorrow
and a good repute (H. iii 67). For the rumour that she was poisoned by
the emperor see c. 14, 5. Ihm retains the form Sestilia, which is given
by M.
..
consules
eodem anno: in 48 A.D., a year in which the emperor
Claudius and their father L. Vitellius were censors (see c. 2, 4). Aulus
Vitellius, the subsequent emperor, was consul ordinarius at the beginning
of the year along with L. Vipstanus Poplicola, their names being used to
mark the year (Tac. A. xi 23, A. Vitellio L. Vipstano consulibus). The
younger brother Lucius was consul suffectus in the latter part of the year.
For the tenure of the consulship under the empire see on Dom. 2, 1. Lucius
also succeeded his brother Aulus as proconsul of Africa (c. 5 infr.).
senatus publico funere honoravit: a funus publicum or funeral at the
expense of the State was first given to Sulla, and always had to be
authorised by a decree of the senate; cf. Tac. A. vi 11, Piso
publico
funere ex decreto senatus celebratus est: A. iii 48, ut mors Sulpicii Quirini
publicis exsequiis frequentaretur, petivit a senatu. The senate might also
instruct a particular magistrate to deliver the panegyric on the dead
(laudatio funebris), e.g. Tacitus as consul was directed to pronounce the
panegyric on Verginius Rufus; cf. Quintil. iii 7, 2, funebres laudationes
pendent frequenter ex aliquo publico officio atque ex senatus consulto magistratibus saepe mandantur. See Mommsen, Staatsr. iii 1187.
statua: the erection of a statue at Rome required the authorisation
of the senate: see on Galb. 23.
pro rostris: "on the front of the Rostra"; see on Vesp. 7, 2, pro
tribunali. For statues on the Rostra cf. Cic. Phil. ix 2; Vell. ii 61; Plin.
N.H. xxxiv 6; Dio xlii 18, xliii 49.
pietatis: allegiance, devotion to the emperor as a divine being and
father of his country (pater patriae); cf. Dom. 11, 3; Aug. 66, 2, laudavit
pietatem tanto opere pro se indignantium. In this sense pietas is frequent
in Tacitus; e.g. A. iii 51, Tiberius cum extolleret pietatem quamvis
modicas principis iniurias acriter ulciscentium. So impietas = maiestas
"treason," see on Dom. 10, 1.
•
§ 2. A. Vitellius natus est: for the difficulty in reconciling the
date given here for the birth of Vitellius with his age at death as
given in c. 18 see note there.
viii Kal. Oct.: Sept. 24.
vii Id. Sept.: Sept. 7.
Druso Caesare: son of the emperor Tiberius; consul with Norbanus
Flaccus in 15 A.D.; cf. Tac. A. i 55, Druso Caesare C. Norbano consulibus
decernitur Germanico triumphus. He was poisoned by Sejanus in 23 A.D.
Norbano Flacco: Gaius Norbanus Flaccus was praetor (urbanus) in
11 A.D. and consul (ordinarius) in 15 A.D. Either he or his brother Lucius
(cons. 19 A.D.) was slain by the German body-guard of Caligula when that
emperor was murdered in 41 A.D. See Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 416.
genituram.. mathematicis: see on c. 14, 4; Tit. 9, 2; Dom. 14, 1.
missum ad legiones: the legions in Lower Germany; see c. 7 infr. and
Oth. 8, 1.
pro afflicto lamentata sit: “mourned him as stricken"; cf. Dom. 2, 3,
pro mortuo deseri iussit: Claud. 37, 1, pro deprenso ("as if caught in the
act'") ad poenas raptus est: Tib. 52, 2, ut et praeclara facta eius pro
supervacuis elevarit: ib. 73, 1, pro contempto se habitum. Tacitus (H. ii 64)
mentions the reply that his mother Sextilia sent to the first letter of Vitellius
from Germany, in the superscription of which he had apparently described
himself as “Germanicus”: Dixisse quin etiam ad primas filii sui epistulas
ferebatur non Germanicum a se, sed Vitellium genitum. Nec ullis postea
fortunae inlecebris aut ambitu (‘‘interested homage") civitatis in gaudium
evicta ("won over to joy'") domus suae tantum adversa sensit.
Capreis: Capreae, mod. Capri, an island off Campania, was a favourite
haunt of Augustus, who acquired it from the people of Naples in exchange
for Aenaria (Aug. 92). In 27 A.D. the emperor Tiberius withdrew there
permanently and spent the last ten years of his life on the island, being
attracted by its solitude and inaccessibility (Tac. A. iv 67). He built
twelve villas, and is said to have given himself over to the most bestial
debauchery which is described in Suet. Tib. 40-43.
inter Tiberiana scorta: cf. Dio lxiv 4, ὅτι γε παιδικὰ τοῦ Τιβερίου ἐγεγόνει
(Οὐιτέλλιος) καὶ ὅτι ἀκολούθως τῇ ἀσελγείᾳ ταύτῃ ἔζη οὐκ ἐνενόησαν (οἱ στρατιῶται).
For scortum used "de viro" cf. Cic. Phil. ii 18 where Antonius is called
“vulgare scortum"; id. Sest. 17; Plaut. Curc. 472.
=
Spintriae:
qui muliebria patitur; cf. Tib. 43, 1: Calig. 16, 1.
Tacitus (A. vi 1) mentions spintria among the new terms of sensuality
introduced by Tiberius at Capreae: tunc primum ignota antea vocabula
reperta sunt sellariorum et spintriarum ex foeditate loci ac multiplici
patientia. Cratinus (ap. Hesych.) has σφίγκτης = κίναιδος. See L. and S.
Gr. Lex. s.v. σφιγκτήρ.
CHAPTER 4.
Gaio per aurigandi studium familiaris: cf. c. 17, 2, cum auriganti
Gaio ministratorem (se) exhiberet. Caligula gave many exhibitions of his
skill as a charioteer: Calig. 54, 1, aurigabat exstructo plurifariam circo.
He was so passionately devoted to the "Greens'' (prasina factio, c. 7, 1, n.)
in the Circus that he constantly supped and lodged in the stable where
their horses were kept. He made presents worth two million sesterces to
their charioteer Eutychus. On the day before the Circensian games he
used to send soldiers to enjoin silence in the neighbourhood, that the horse
Incitatus ("Speedy'") might not be disturbed. Not merely did he give this
horse a stall of marble, purple blankets, and a jewelled frontlet, but he also
provided him with a furnished house and a retinue of slaves for the
reception of those invited in the horse's name; it was said that he even
intended to make him consul (Calig. 55).
Claudio per aleae studium: Claudius was a confirmed gambler, playing
even while taking carriage-exercise; cf. Claud. 33, 2, aleam studiosissime
lusit, de cuius arte librum quoque emisit, solitus etiam in gestatione ludere,
ita essedo (“carriage") alveoque (“dice-board'') adaptatis ne lusus confunderetur. Seneca (Apoc. 14) describes Claudius being sentenced by
Aeacus in the underworld to gamble with a bottomless dice-box: Aeacus
iubet illum alea ludere pertuso fritillo. For the gaming propensities of
other emperors see on Dom. 21.
Neroni acceptior: Tacitus (H. ii 71) is very severe on the admiration
and imitation of the debauchee Nero by the debauchee Vitellius: Quantoque
magis propinquabat (Romam Vitellius), tanto corruptius iter inmixtis
histrionibus et spadonum gregibus et cetero Neronianae aulae ingenio
("characteristics'"); namque et Neronem ipsum Vitellius admiratione
celebrabat, sectari cantantem solitus non necessitate, qua honestissimus
quisque, sed luxu et saginae mancipatus emptusque.
propter eadem haec: Nero was an enthusiastic devotee of the Circus
and also drove a team himself; cf. Ner. 22, 1, equorum studio vel praecipue
ab ineunte aetate flagravit: ib. 24, 2, aurigavit quoque plurifariam,
Olympiis vero etiam decemiugem: ib. 53, quia Apollinem cantu, Solem
aurigando aequiperare existimaretur. He played at dice for 400,000
sesterces a point, i.e. for each pip of the winning throw (ib. 30, 3, quadringenis in punctum sestertiis aleam lusit). Dio (lxv 2) describes Vitellius
as a frequenter of pothouses and gaming dens and an associate of dancers
and charioteers.
peculiari merito: the only other example cited of peculiaris in the
sense of "praecipuus, insignis, singularis" is Just. xxxvi 4, 3, Omissa
deinde regni administratione, hortos fodiebat, gramina seminabat, et noxia
innoxiis permiscebat, eaque omnia veneni succo infecta, velut peculiare
munus, amicis mittebat. For another meaning of peculiaris see Galb. 12, 3.
praesidens certamini Neroneo: Vitellius was one of the ex-consuls
(consulares) whom Nero chose by lot to preside over the new quinquennial
contest called Neronia or Neroneus agon (Ner. 21, 1) which he established
in 60 A.D.; cf. Ner. 12, 3, Instituit et quinquennale certamen primus
omnium Romae more Graeco triplex, musicum gymnicum equestre, quod
appellavit Neronia .. Magistros toto certamini praeposuit consulares sorte,
sede praetorum: Tac. A. xiv 20, quinquennale ludicrum Romae institutum
est ad morem Graeci certaminis, varia fama, ut cuncta ferme nova. The
second lustrale certamen in 65 A.D. is mentioned in Tac. A. xvi 4. The
contest was discontinued after Nero's death (68 A.D.), but Domitian's agon
Capitolinus (see Dom. 4, 4) was a revival of it in another form. We find
mention of a celebration of Nero's lustrale certamen under Gordianus
Nepos; cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 27, Eoque anno (242 A.D.) lustri certamine,
quod Nero Romam invexerat, aucto firmatoque, in Persas profectus est.
See Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 149 sqq.
citharoedos: see on Dom. 4, 4. Nero, who had previously performed
in the theatre at Neapolis (Naples), gave his first performance at Rome in
65 A.D. in the great theatre of Pompeius. The demand of the people to
hear his 'divine voice," a demand to which he gladly yielded, is described
in Ner. 21, 1: Cum magni aestimaret cantare etiam Romae, Neroneum
agona ante praestitutum diem revocavit flagitantibusque cunctis caelestem
vocem respondit quidem in hortis se copiam volentibus facturum, sed
adiuvante vulgi preces etiam statione militum, quae tunc excubabat, repraesentaturum ("would perform forthwith") se pollicitus est libens; ac sine
mora nomen suum in albo profitentium citharoedorum ("the list of competing lyre-players") iussit ascribi sorticulaque in urnam cum ceteris
demissa intravit ordine suo, simul praefecti praetorii citharam sustinentes,
post tribuni militum iuxtaque amicorum intimi. He then sang the part
of Niobe, and postponed the award of the prize and the rest of the contest
to the following year, that he might appear again. He made his professional tour of all the competitions in Greece in 66-67 (see Vesp. 4, 4). At
the outbreak of the revolt in Gaul against him nothing irritated him so
much as a proclamation of Vindex in which he was called a bad citharoedus.
Among his last utterances was the famous “Qualis artifex pereo!”
"What an artist I am to perish!"
quamvis flagitantibus cunctis: quamvis c. ptc. is not class. but is
frequent in post-Aug. writers; e.g. Tac. A. xv 38, quamvis patente effugio:
xv 71 quamvis absolutus. Suetonius has it in Iul. 26, 2; 48 (abl. abs.); 70:
Calig. 13; Claud. 20, 2 (abl. abs.); 27, 1: Vesp. 15. See KühnerStegmann, ii 445.
promittere: Becher would read prodire.
egressum theatro: Tacitus, in the account which he gives in A. xvi 4,
does not mention that Nero left the theatre and did not return till
Vitellius had prevailed upon him to appear. According to Tac. Nero
appeared first as a poet and then as a musician, his second performance
being given in response to the insistent demand of the people that he
would make public property of all his accomplishments: primo carmen
in scaena recitat; mox flagitante vulgo ut omnia studia publicaret
(haec enim verba dixere) ingreditur theatrum, cunctis citharae legibus
obtemperans, ne fessus resideret, ne sudorem nisi ea quam indutui gerebat
veste detergeret, ut nulla oris aut narium excrementa viserentur. Postremo
flexus genu et coetum illum manu veneratus sententias iudicum opperiebatur
ficto pavore.
quasi legatione suscepta: for quasi c. abl. abs. cf. Aug. 16, quasi
occasione ultionis oblata: ib. 19, quasi debita sibi fato dominatione: Cic.
Sen. 83, nec vero velim quasi decurso spatio ad carceres a calce revocari.
See Kühner-Stegmann, i 790 sq.
exorandumque praebuerat: = praestiterat ut exoraretur. Corrections
have been proposed (e.g. exoratumque Ernesti, exorabilemque Bentley),
but no change seems necessary.
CHAPTER 5.
trium principum: Caligula, Claudius, and Nero.
honoribus: including the consulship in 48 A.D., see c. 3, 1. Tacitus
(H. iii 86) says that Vitellius owed all his distinctions, including his
consulship and his priesthoods, to the renown of his father: consulatum,
sacerdotia, nomen locumque inter primores nulla sua industria, sed cuncta
patris claritudine adeptus.
sacerdotiis: Vitellius is mentioned as one of the Fratres Arvales
during Nero's reign in 57–60, 62 (?), 63, 66 (?) A.D. (C.I.L. vi 2039-2044,
2046: Henzen Acta Fr. Arv. p. lxiv sqq.). He appears on coins as quindecimvir sacris faciundis (Eckhel, vi p. 316: Cohen, i² p. 365), but it is
not certain that this was before he became emperor; see Prosop. Imp.
Rom. iii 449. Other examples of priesthoods conferred as honours were
those given to Galba (Galb. 8, 1) and Vespasian (Vesp. 4, 2).
proconsulatum Africae: Vitellius held this in 60 or 61 A.D. Cf. Tac.
H. i 70, pro consule Vitellium Siliani in Africa habuerant (‘Siliani" were
a famous cavalry corps called after C. Silius, legatus of Tiberius in Upper
Germany; this "ala Siliana" had served in Africa when Vitellius was
proconsul, and supported him afterwards against Otho). The proconsulship of Africa was also held by Galba (Galb. 7, 1), by Otho's father
(Oth. 1, 2), and by Vespasian (Vesp. 4, 3).
curam operum publicorum: this was one of the new offices established
at Rome by Augustus; cf. Aug. 37, Quo plures partem administrandae rei
publicae caperent, nova officia excogitavit: curam operum publicorum,
viarum, aquarum, alvei Tiberis, frumenti populo dividundi, praefecturam
urbis, etc. The first four of these departments had previously been under
the control of the censors. The curatores operum publicorum were two in
number. Their full official title seems to have been "curatores aedium
sacrarum, locorum et operum publicorum,” which in inscriptions is
abbreviated in various ways. The occupant of the position must be of
senatorial rank and have held the office of praetor; nearly all those who
are mentioned were ex-consuls. See Daremberg-Saglio, i 1022 sq.
Mommsen, Staatstr. ii³ 450, 1147 sqq.
innocentiam: see on 'innocens” c. 2, 4. Cf. Cic. Manil. 13, where
“innocentia imperatorum” is contrasted with "avaritia imperatorum.”
Tacitus (H. ii 97) records the integrity of Vitellius' administration of
Africa and contrasts it with that of Vespasian: Quippe integrum illic (i.e.
in Africa) ac favorabilem ("popular'") proconsulatum Vitellius, famosum
invisumque Vespasianus egerat: proinde socii de imperio utriusque
coniectabant, sed experimentum contra fuit. Suetonius gives quite a
different account of Vespasian's administration of Africa; see Vesp. 4, 3.
biennio continuato: abl. of duration of time; see on Galb. 6, 1.
succedenti fratri: his brother Lucius succeeded him as proconsul in
Africa; he had previously succeeded him as consul in the latter part of
48 A.D. (see с. 3, 1).
legatus: under the Empire, as under the Republic, a certain number
of legati were attached to the governors of provinces, to whom the governors
could delegate certain of their functions. Three were assigned to the
consular proconsuls in Asia and Africa and one to the praetorian proconsuls
in the inferior provinces like Sicily and Baetica. Nominally they were
chosen by the proconsul, but his choice had to be approved by the emperor.
They must be senators of a rank equal or inferior to the governor but not
superior (cf. Dio liii 14, where they are called πάρεδροι "assessors"). As
a rule the legati were of a lower rank. Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 248) says
that consular legati of a consular proconsul are exceptional and perhaps
only found in the case of relatives. Besides this example of the two
Vitellii in Africa, Mommsen cites C.I.L. viii 7059; Lucian, Demonax 30;
vit. Gordiani 7, 18. See also Greenidge, Rom. Public Life, p. 433.
substitisset: = remansisset in provincia (Baumg.-Cr., who points out
that fratri depends on legatus). The variant substitutus esset (X) yields
no satisfactory sense though read by some of the older editors, e.g.
Burman, who says: "Posset tamen ‘fratri substitutus esset' ita explicari
ut frater non venerit in provinciam sibi datam, sed absentis eius vices noster
Vitellius, ut legatus, gessisset." Graevius, reading substitutus esset, would
alter succedenti to decedenti (Heinsius secedenti).
in urbano officio: i.e. his position as curator aedium sacrarum, locorum
et operum publicorum.
surripuisse: used of sacrilegious pilfering also in Plaut. Men. 922, At
ego te sacram coronam surrupuisse Iovi scio: id. Trin. 83: Cic. Div. i 54,
cum ex aede Herculis patera aurea subrepta esset.
stagnum: cf. Plin. N.H. xxxiv 159, Plumbi nigri origo duplex est; aut
enim sua provenit vena nec quidquam aliud ex sese parit, aut cum argento
nascitur mixtisque venis conflatur. Huius qui primus fluit in fornacibus
liquor stannum appellatur; qui secundus, argentum. The forms in the
Romance languages, Ital. stagno, Fr. étain, Span. estaño, support stagnum
(so Ihm with the better MSS.) against stannum, which is the spelling
generally adopted. Walde (op. cit.) suggests a connexion with σταφύλη
"the plummet of a level," but prefers to regard stagnum as a word which
came from the Celtic, since Pliny mentions "tinning" as a Gallic discovery.
aurichalcum: this form of the word is due to a false assimilation to
(and derivation from) aurum, the more correct form being orichalcum from
ὀρείχαλκος, “mountain (ὄρος) copper” or “brass." Plato (Crit. 114 E)
describes ὀρείχαλκος, as a precious metal no longer existent; cf. Plin. N.H.
xxxiv 2, aurichalco, quod praecipuam bonitatem admirationemque diu
obtinuit, nec reperitur longo iam tempore effeta tellure. In Plautus it is
a precious metal and aurichalcum and aurum are used in similar phrases;
e.g. Epid. 407, non carust auro contra (‘he is worth his weight in gold''):
Pseud. 692, aurichalco contra non carum fuit. Cicero (Off. iii 23,92)
speaks of it as an existing metal of little worth: Si quis aurum vendens
orichalcum ("brass'") se putet vendere, indicetne ei vir bonus aurum illud
esse an emat denario, quod sit mille denarium? See Conington on Aen. xii
87, auro squalentem alboque orichalco | circumdat toricam umeris; Wilkins
on Hor. A.P. 202, tibia non ut nunc orichalco vincta tubaeque | aemula.
supposuisse: a similar fraud is alleged of Julius Caesar in Iul. 54:
in primo consulatu tria milia pondo auri furatus e Capitolio, tantumdem
inaurati aeris reposuit.
CHAPTER 6.
Petroniam: daughter of P. Petronius who was consul suffectus in 19 A.D.,
proconsul of Asia for six years (prob. 29-35), and legatus pro praetore of
Syria in 39-42; he is mentioned as an intimate of the emperor Claudius
in Sen. Apoc. 14, P. Petronius, vetus convictor Claudii, homo Claudiana
lingua disertus; he himself had married into the house of the Vitellii,
his mother-in-law's name being Vitellia (Tac. A. iii 49). Petronia was
divorced by Vitellius and she then married Cn. Cornelius Dolabella (see
Galb. 12, 2), a marriage which roused the animosity and suspicion of
Vitellius who ordered the death of Dolabella. This murder at the beginning
of his reign greatly damaged the reputation of Vitellius; cf. Tac. H. ii 64,
magna cum invidia novi principatus, cuius hoc primum specimen noscebatur.
captum altero oculo:
luscum “blind of one eye." The abl. of
respect or limitation was used with captus in the sense of "seized" by a
malady (Lucr. v 929, genus humanum multo fuit durius
nec facile
ex aestu nec frigore quod caperetur); cf. Liv. xxii '2, Hannibal altero
oculo capitur; id. xliii 7, princeps pedibus captus: Cic. Div. ii 3, 9, si
captus oculis sit, ut Tiresias fuit: Verg. G. i 183, oculis capti talpae
("moles"). See Kühner-Stegmann, i 392.
=
sub condicione,
si: cf. Iul. 68, 1, concessam sibi sub condicione
vitam si: Claud. 24, 1: Plin. Ep. viii 18, 4; so sub condicione, ut (or ne),
Suet. Tib. 13, 2:42, 2: Plin. Ep. iv 13, 10: Phaedr. iv 5, 8, matrem fecit
heredem senex Sub condicione, ut. Suetonius uses indifferently sub condicione (not in Cic.) and ea condicione (with ut in Galb. 15, 1: Vitell. 15, 1:
Dom. 9,2; with ne in Tib. 26, 1).
..
hunc manu emisit: two similar instances of children being emancipated from the patria potestas, in order that they might take inheritances,
are mentioned in Pliny's Letters: iv 2, filium Regulus emancipavit, ut
heres matris exsisteret (where see Merrill's note): viii 18, Curtilius Mancia,
perosus generum suum
sub ea condicione filiam eius, neptem suam,
instituerat heredem, si esset manu patris emissa. The right of a Roman
father to sell his children came to be used as a means whereby children
could be made independent of the patria potestas and so become capable
of inheriting property in their own right. The law of the Twelve Tables
laid down "Si pater filium ter venumduit ('sells'), liber esto.” The
father sold the son to a fictitious purchaser who at once manumitted him
(as he might manumit a slave he had purchased) and then the son reverted
into his father's power; this process was repeated a second time, but by
a third sale the son ceased to be in the power of the father, and was in
the “mancipium” of the fictitious purchaser, who could either manumit
him himself (thus acquiring the right of a patronus over a freedman to
succeed to half his estate at death), or, as was more usual, remancipated
or resold him to the father who himself manumitted him and became his
patronus. One sale was sufficient in the case of a daughter. Justinian
substituted for this cumbrous process a simple declaration before a magistrate (Inst. i 12, 6). See Roby, Rom. Private Law i 74, and Poste on
Gaius i 132 sqq.
insimulatum: insimulare is used here, as generally, of a false accusation
(Festus defines it as "crimen in aliquem confingere"); but the verb was
also used in the wider sense of accusare, whether the charge was false or
true. It does not occur elsewhere in Suet.
parricidii: "(attempted) parricide"; cf. Calig. 12, 3, etsi non de perfecto, at certe de cogitato quondam parricidio professus. Suetonius uses
parricidium for the murder (1) of a father: (2) of a mother, Ner. 34, 5:
(3) of other relatives, Tib. 66; Ner. 33, 1: (4) of one who was "pater
patriae,” Claud. 12, 3; so the Ides of March when Caesar was murdered
were called “Parricidium” (Iul. 88, 1): (5) of any freeman, Iul. 42, 3.
The wide sense in which parricidium was used from a very early period is
seen from Fest. p. 221 Müll: parricidii quaestores appellabantur, qui
solebant creari causa rerum capitalium quaerendarum. Nam parricida non
utique is, qui parentem cecidisset, dicebatur, sed qualemcumque hominem
indemnatum. Ita fuisse indicat lex Numae Pompilii regis, his composita
verbis: “Si qui hominem liberum dolo sciens morti duit, paricidas esto.”
Philologists usually reject the derivation from pater and caedo which is
accepted by Quintilian (viii 6, 34), who cites as an example of κατάχρησις
or abusio the extended use of parricida for matris aut fratris interfector.
See Walde, op. cit.
Galeriam Fundanam: highly praised by Tacitus (H. ii 64) for her
exemplary modesty and for keeping aloof from the horrors (tristia) with
which her husband was associated: Et Triariae (wife of Lucius Vitellius,
brother of the emperor) licentiam modestum e proximo exemplum onerabat
("made more invidious"), Galeria imperatoris uxor, non inmixta tristibus.
She is also mentioned (ib. 60) as protecting Galerius Trachalus, a relative
of her own and a leading Othonian, on the accession of her husband to the
throne. On the other hand, Dio (lxv 4) speaks of her extravagant requirements and says that she derided even the sumptuous appointments of
Nero's Aurea Domus as absurdly inadequate for her needs: ἡ γυνὴ δὲ
αὐτοῦ Γαλερία, ὡς ὀλίγου ἐν τῷ βασιλικῷ κόσμου εὑρεθέντος, κατεγέλα. In this
(according to Dio) she shared the sentiments of her husband Vitellius who,
though in general an ardent admirer of Nero (see c. 11, 2), blamed him
for having been badly housed and poorly provided with furniture. For
the splendours of the Aurea Domus see on Oth. 7, 1.
de hac.. liberos tulit: for this expression see on Vesp. 3. Vitellius,
when at Lugdunum on his way from Germany to Rome to assume the
empire, assembled his army to greet his infant son; he brought him out,
wrapped in a military cloak (paludamentum), and holding him in his arms
conferred on him the title of "Germanicus" with all the insignia of
imperial rank (Tac. H. ii 59; in Zon. xi 16 the boy is said to have been
six years old at the time). This “parvulus filius” was borne in a litter
in the sorrowful procession when Vitellius left the Palace to surrender the
empire (Tac. iii 67). He was put to death by order of Mucianus in the
following year (see c. 18 infr.). The daughter was of marriageable age
(nubilis, Tac. iii 78) on her father's accession in 69 A.D., and had been
betrothed by him to D. Valerius Asiaticus (Tac. i 59) who seems to have
died before the wedding, and, according to popular report, Vitellius tried
to detach Antonius Primus from the Flavians by offering him her hand
in marriage (Tac. iii 78). Suetonius (Vesp. 14) tells us that Vespasian
arranged a splendid match for her and gave her a handsome dowry, but
we are not told the name of the bridegroom. Both children appear on
coins of Vitellius with the superscription Liberi Imp. German. or Imp.
German. Aug. (Eckhel, vi 315; Cohen, i² 366; Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 454).
titubantia oris: "stammering” “stuttering"; cf. Claud. 30, linguae
titubantia. The form titubantia is not cited from any other author;
linguae titubatio occurs in Macrob. Sat. vii 6, 10. Cf. the use of titubare
in Ov. A.A. i 598, Fac titubet blaeso subdola lingua sono; Cic. dom. 54,
mente ac lingua titubante.
elinguem: tongueless” “tongue-tied"; cf. Liv. x 19, ex muto atque
elingui facundum etiam consulem haberent: Cic. post redit. 3, 7, mutum
forum, elinguem curiam, tacitam et fractam civitatem videbatis: Tac.
Dial. 36, mutum et elinguem videri deforme habebatur. The Gr. ἄγλωσσος
is used in the same way: e.g. Pind. Nem. viii 24, ἢ τιν᾿ ἄγλωσσον μέν, ἦτορ
δ᾽ ἄλκιμον, λάθα κατέχει | ἐν λυγρῷ νείκει.
..
CHAPTER 7.
a Galba missus est: the legions stationed in Lower Germany (i
Germanica, v Alaudae, xv Primigenia, xvi Gallica) were left without a
legatus of consular rank from the time that Fonteius Capito was put to
death by Galba in 68 A.D. (see Galb. 11) till Vitellius was sent there about
Dec. 1 in the same year. According to Tacitus (H. i 9) Galba thought
that by appointing a commander of noble birth, son of one who had been
three times consul and censor, the disaffected German legions would be
reconciled to the new régime, or would at least remain quiet: Inferioris
Germaniae legiones diutius sine consulari fuere, donec missu Galbae A.
Vitellius aderat, censoris Vitellii ac ter consulis filius: id satis videbatur.
inferiorem Germaniam: the two Germanies were not provinces in
the same sense as the other imperial provinces; they were merely two
frontier districts along the left (or Gallic) bank of the Rhine, each occupied
by four legions under a legatus of consular rank. Upper Germany
extended from Lake Constance to Brohl, midway between Bonn and Coblenz,
and Lower Germany from Brohl to the sea. The most important military
station in Upper Germany was Moguntiacum (Mainz). In Lower Germany
the civil capital was Colonia Agrippinensis (Cologne) and the military
capital was Vetera or Castra Vetera (Xanten). For the purposes of
civil administration the two Germanies formed part of Gallia Belgica and
their taxes were gathered by the procurator of that province. It was
probably after the revolt of L. Antonius Saturninus (Dom. 6, 2) that
governors of the two Germanies were first appointed with full civil as
well as military authority. See Henderson, Five Roman Emperors p. 114.
T. Vini: see on Galb. 14, 2. Vinius, together with Laco and Icelus,
completely dominated Galba. The reading Vini was restored by Torrentius
for iuni or iunii of the MSS.; in Galb. 14, 2, iunius and lunius are variants
for uinius (Vinius).
factionis Venetae: the Blue was one of the four racing companies
(factiones) in the Circus; see on Dom. 7, 1. The devotion of Vitellius
(like Caracalla, Dio lxxvii 10) to the Blue is mentioned again in c. 14,
quosdam de plebe, quod Venetae factioni male dixerant, interemit. Dio
(lxv 5) says that Vitellius riding in state and wearing the imperial purple
seemed a ridiculous sight to those who remembered him wearing the dress
of the Blues and rubbing down the chariot-horses in the Circus (τοὺς
·ἀγωνιστὰς ἵππους ἐν τῇ οὐενετίῳ ἐσθῆτι ψήχοντα). The Green (prasina, viridis)
being the factio favoured by Domitian (as by Caligula and Nero), the
Blue is ridiculed by Martial, vi 46, Vapulat adsidue veneti quadriga
flagello, | nec currit : magnam rem, Catiane, facit. See also Mart. x 48, 23;
xiv 131. Walde (op. cit.) connects venetus “sea-blue” with unda.
..
nisi quod electum: i.e. the general opinion that Vitellius owed his
appointment to the influence of Vinius is shown to be false by Galba's
own statement of his reasons for his selection. Hand (Tursellinus, iv 235)
discusses various explanations given of the elliptical use of nisi quod ..
His own theory, which seems the simplest, is that nisi quod is a compressed
way of saying non est, si est quod, or non est, si in considerationem venit
quod. He explains nisi quia similarly. Suetonius uses nisi quod in three
other passages: Vesp. 4, 3; Dom. 4, 4; Iul. 45, 1, fuisse traditur
valitudine prospera, nisi quod tempore extremo repente animo linqui atque
etiam per somnum exterreri solebat. For instances in Plaut., Cic., Tac.,
etc., see Kühner-Stegmann ii 416.
qui de solo victu cogitarent: Dio (lxv 2) says that Vitellius cared
for nothing "divine or human" except self-indulgence: τῇ τε τρυφῇ καὶ
τῇ ἀσελγείᾳ προσκείμενος, οὐδὲν ἔτι τῶν ἄλλων οὔτε τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων οὔτε τῶν θείων
ἐφρόντιζεν.
profundam gulam: cf. Curt. x 2, пес pudet profundo ventre devictarum
gentium spolia circumferentes, etc. In Plaut. Capt. 182 a greedy parasite's
stomach is described as a bottomless abyss (profundum).
For gula
("gullet'') in the sense of gluttony cf. c. 13, 3, homo non profundae modo
sed intempestivae gulae: Juv. 1, 140, quanta est gula, quae sibi totos |
ponit apros?
..
§ 2. exituro viaticum defuisse: cf. Curt. x 2 (Alexander upbraids his
troops): In Europam ire properatis, rege deserto, cum pluribus vestrum
defuturum viaticum fuerit, ni aes alienum luissem.
egestate rei familiaris: so Tacitus (H. ii 59) describes Vitellius on
his march to Rome "nullo principali paratu, sed vetere egestate con-
-spicuus"; cf. Plut. Galb. 22, (Οὐϊτέλλιος) τὴν λοιδορουμένην ὑπ᾽ ἐνίων πενίαν
δεῖγμα λαμπρὸν ἔχων χρηστότητος καὶ μεγαλοφροσύνης. The objective gen. "rei
familiaris'' is added as in Sall. Iug. 44, egestas pabuli; Tac. A. vi 23, eg.
cibi; Lucr. v 1211, eg. rationis; there is no example in Cic.
uxore et liberis: Galeria Fundana and her children, see c. 6. Tacitus-
(H. i 75) says that Vitellius sent letters from Germany to Titianus, brother
of Otho, threatening that he would make him answerable with his life for
the safety of his (Vitellius') mother and children at Rome.
quos Romae relinquebat: under the Republic provincial governors
could not bring their wives to the provinces, but under the early empire
this rule was frequently broken; in 21 A.D. the senate rejected a motion
“ne quem magistratum, cui provincia obvenisset, uxor comitaretur” (Tac.
A. iii 33); in 24 A.D. they decreed that a governor should be held accountable for any misconduct of his wife in the province, such as is described
in Juv. viii 128, where see Mayor's note.
meritorio: “hired"; cf. Iul. 57, meritoria raeda: Calig. 39, 1,
meritoria vehicula: Claud. 15, 4, meritoria scorta. The neut. pl. as a
subst. means "lodgings"; e.g. Juv. iii 234, quae meritoria somnum |
admittunt?
cenaculo: "attic” or “garret"; cf. Juv. x 18, rarus venit in cenacula
miles: Quintil. vi 3, 64, cum cenaculum eius perplueret: Apul. Met. ix 40.
Varro (L.L. v 162) explains how the word got this meaning: ubi cenabant
cenaculum vocitabant posteaquam in superiore parte cenitare coeperunt,
superioris domus universa cenacula dicta. Suetonius uses cenaculum in
two other passages: Aug. 45, 1, Ipse circenses ex amicorum libertorumque
cenaculis (“upper rooms”) spectabat; ib. 78, 2, in proximo cuiuscumque
domesticorum cenaculo manebat. Petronius, Satyr. 38, describes a nouveau
riche letting his garret, having purchased a house: C. Pompeius Diogenes
ex kalendis Iuliis cenaculum locat; ipse enim domum emit.
abditis: abdere with the abl. of place occurs also in Oth. 6, 3, abditus
sella muliebri: Iul. 20, 1: Tib. 12, 2, etc. Cicero (Arch. 12) has qui se
litteris abdiderunt (where Reid would insert in), but before the Silver
Age this constr. is almost entirely poetical, e.g. Verg. G. iii 96, abde domo.
Another constr. is used by Suetonius in Galb. 20, 2, in gremium abdidit.
Cicero elsewhere uses in c. abl., in c. acc., or acc. (Att. ix 6, 1, neque me
Arpinum hoc tempore abdam).
ablocaret: "let out,” alii habitandam locaret. This compound
(= ἀπομισθόω) is peculiar to Suetonius, who uses it also in Iul. 26, 2, ea
quae ad epulum pertinerent, quamvis macellariis ablocata (“though contracts had been given to the market-vendors''), etiam domesticatim .
apparabat.
matris: Sextilia (c. 3, 1).
unionem: uniones were the largest, most beautiful, and most highly
valued of all pearls. Pliny (N.H. xii 2) says that they were got from the
mare rubrum (Red Sea or Persian Gulf), and that they received their name
from each of them being unique, no two alike: N.H. ix 112, nulli duo
reperiuntur indiscreti, unde nomen unionum Romanae scilicet imposuere
deliciae. The two finest uniones ever seen were those worn as earrings by
Cleopatra (see on Galb. 18, 2). The number, weight, and value of the
uniones worn in the ears by Roman matrons are denounced by Seneca.
(Ben. vii 9, 4; Vit. Beat. 17, 2).
pigneraverit: "pawned," pignori dederit; cf. Juv. vii 73, alveolos et
laenam pignerat. The deponent pignerari means "to establish a lien on"
(pignoribus obstringere et devincire sibi), e.g. Suet. Claud. 10, 4 (of
Claudius' largess to the soldiers), primus Caesarum fidem militum etiam
praemio pigneratus: cf. Cic. Rep. i 8, Phil. xiv 32. For the perf. pigneraverit coupled with the imperf. ablocaret see on Galb. 3, 1; Bentley's conjecture ablocarit is needless.
creditorum turbam: Dio (lxv 3 and 5) says that Vitellius spent
incalculable sums (ἀμύθητα ἀνήλισκε) on gluttony, gambling, actors, and
charioteers; and he was in debt to so many that no one could see him in
the Forum on account of the multitude of his creditors (ὃν οὐδεὶς οὐδὲ ἐν τῇ
ἀγορᾷ πρότερον διὰ τὸ τῶν δανειστῶν πλῆθος ἰδεῖν ἐδύνατο). His creditors would
not let him start for Germany till he had given security (ἐξορμῶντος αὐτοῦ ..
ἐπελάβοντο, καὶ μόλις ποτὲ κατεγγυηθέντα ἀπέλυσαν).
Sinuessanos Formianosque: Sinuessa was a town on the Tyrrhenian
sea, on the borders of Latium and Campania, now ruins at the foot of
Monte Dragone. Formiae was 18 miles from Sinuessa, where the town of
Mola di Gaeta now stands. Both Sinuessa and Formiae were on the Appia
Via.
"diverted to his own use” “embezzled"; cf. Cic.
Verr. ii 4, 68, interverso hoc regali dono: id. Phil. ii 79, promissum et
receptum intervertit, ad seque transtulit. Plautus, who first uses the verb,
has not merely intervortere aliquid, but also intervortere aliquem ("to
defraud'") and intervortere aliquem aliquo. We have no information as
to how Vitellius came to handle the revenues of these two towns. Even
if we assume that he could have been a redemptor vectigalium, the towns
would normally have been secured against loss by his sureties (praedes).
interverterat:
terrore calumniae: calumnia (from O. Lat. calvi "to deceive") was
used in two senses: (1) as here, a false action or prosecution brought by
one who "intelligit non recte se agere sed vexandi adversarii gratia
actionem instituit” (Gaius iv 178); cf. Suet. Dom. 9, 3; (2) an action or
conviction for dishonest litigation; cf. Cic. dom. 19, 49, accusare
propter calumniae metum non ausus est. See Poste on Gaius l.c.
iniuriarum: on the iniuriarum actio see Roby, Rom. Private Law ii 220.
The offence is defined generally in ad Herenn. iv 25, 35, Iniuriae sunt, quae
aut pulsatione corpus aut convicio aures aut aliqua turpitudine vitam
cuiuspiam violant. Proceedings might be either civil or criminal; cf. Just.
Inst. iv 4, 10, In summa sciendum est de omni iniuria eum qui passus est
posse vel criminaliter agere vel civiliter. Et si quidem civiliter agatur,
aestimatione facta, secundum quod dictum est, poena imponitur; sin
autem criminaliter, officio iudicis extraordinaria poena reo irrogatur.
formulam intendisset: a technical expression in the procedure per
formulas, i.e. by issues stated by the praetor. The word “formulae”
expressed the different forms in which the directions of the praetor were
given to the iudex or arbiter or reciperatores to whom he sent the case
for trial. The praetor could vary the formula to meet the requirements
of justice in each case. The phrase “formulam intendere’” (cf. actionem
intendere, Cic.) was used of the plaintiff; “formulam accipere” of the
defendant. In Suet. Claud. 14 “formula excidere” means "to fail in an
action"; cf. “formula cadere" (Sen.) and the common “causa cadere"
(= ''litem perdere"). Sandars (Institutes of Justinian p. 69) collects and
analyzes a specimen formula from Gaius: "Iudex esto: Quod Aulus
Agerius Numerio Negidio hominem vendidit; si paret Numerium Negidium
Aulo Agerio sestertium x. milia dare oportere, iudex Numerium Negidium
Aulo Agerio sestertium x. milia condemnato, si non paret, absolvito.''.
The words "Iudex esto” are the order for the appointment of the judge
(whose name would be inserted); from “quod” to “vendidit” is the
demonstratio or statement of the facts on which the plaintiff bases his
case viz. that he has sold the slave to N.N.; from “si paret” to “dare
oportere is the intentio or precise statement of the demand which the
plaintiff made against (tendebat in) his adversary.
The iudex has to
determine whether A.A. has sold the slave to N.N. at the price he alleges,
and whether the debt is still owing; if the judge is satisfied on these
points (si paret), he is instructed to pronounce judgment against N.N., if
not, he is to be acquitted; the words from "iudex Numerium” to the
end form what was known as the condemnatio.
quinquaginta sestertiis: about £425.
§3. male animatus
exercitus: Tacitus (H. i 8) mentions the
reasons for their disaffection, including the execution of their legatus
Fonteius Capito (see Galb. 11) by Galba's orders: Germanici exercitus,
quod periculosissimum in tantis viribus, solliciti et irati, superbia recentis
victoriae (over Vindex, see Galb. 9, 2) et metu tanquam alias partes fovissent. Tarde a Nerone desciverant; nec statim pro Galba Verginius: an
imperare noluisset dubium: delatum ei a milite imperium conveniebat.
Fonteium Capitonem occisum etiam qui queri non poterant, tamen indignabantur. Dux deerat, abducto Verginio per simulationem amicitiae; quem
non remitti atque etiam reum esse tanquam suum crimen accipiebant.
supinis manibus: with hands uplifted and upturned to heaven; cf.
Verg. A. iii 176, tendoque supinas | ad caelum cum voce manus (= ὑπτίας
χεῖρας ἀνατείνω). Hor. C. iii 23, 1, Caelo supinas si tuleris manus. If this
is the meaning here, the soldiers are represented as returning thanks to
the gods for the coming of Vitellius; but it is possible also to explain
“supinis manibus excepit" by the Gr. ὑπτίαις ταῖς χερσὶν ὑποδέχεσθαί τι
(Philostr. 771), the soldiers holding up their hands as if to catch a gift
dropping from the sky.
ter consulis filium: for the three consulships held by his father
Lucius Vitellius seé c. 2, 4. Cf. Tac. H. i 9, A. Vitellius censoris Vitellii
ac ter consulis filius: ib. 52, Vitellio tres patris consulatus, censuram,
collegium Caesaris et imponere iam pridem imperatoris dignationem et
auferre privati securitatem: Plut. Galb. 22 (quoted on c. 2, 4). For the
attributive use of ter see on “olim” c. 17, 2.
aetate integra: cf. Calig. 25, Caesoniam neque facie insigni neque
aetate integra amavit: Tib. 10, integra aetate ac valitudine. Suetonius
also uses integer aetate (Aug. 19, neque aetate neque corpore integer).
Vitellius was 53 years old at the time and hardly to be described as "aetate
integra''; Servius on Aen. ix 255 (integer aevi Ascanius) says "Integer
aevi, id est adolescens cui aetas integra superést.”
..
prodigo: cf. Auson. Carm. 259, 9, prodiga sceptra Vitelli.
persuasionem:
=
fidem, firmam opinionem; cf. Tib. 69, persuasionis
plenus cuncta fato agi: Plin. N.H. xxv 2, durat tamen tradita persuasio
in magna parte vulgi, veneficiis et herbis id cogi: Quintil. i 1, qui paulum
aliquid ultra primas litteras progressi, falsam sibi scientiae persuasionem
induerunt. In Cicero persuasio is used in an active sense for the act of
persuading: Inv. i 5, dicere apposite ad persuasionem.
caligatorum militum:
=
....
manipularium, gregariorum, "common.
soldiers'" "privates"; cf. Aug. 25, 3, vallares ac murales coronas
saepe etiam caligatis dabat: [Quintil.] decl. iii 15, cui parere caligatum
lex iubet: ib. 19, commendem tibi ordinem caligati militis. The caliga, or
boot of the rank and file, was of leather with soles thickly studded with
iron nails; see Mayor on Juv. xvi 24, offendere tot caligas, tot | milia
clavorum. The emperor Gaius got his nickname "Caligula" from being
brought up in the camp and wearing the private's uniform; Calig. 9,
Caligulae cognomen castrensi ioco traxit, quia manipulario habitu inter
milites educabatur.
quoque: "even"; see App. I. § 13.
stabula ac deversoria: cf. Plin. Ep. vi 19, urbem Italiamque non pro
patria sed pro hospitio (= deversorio, caupona) aut stabulo quasi peregrinantes habere. The stabulum provided accommodation primarily for
the horses or mules of the viatores, and there Vitellius would meet the
muliones; but the word is also found (e.g. in Mart. vi 94) in the general
sense of an inn. Ulpian, Dig. iv 9, 5, differentiates between cauponae,
for travellers only, and stabula, for beasts of burden: Caupo (mercedem
accipit), ut viatores manere in caupona patiatur; stabularius, ut permittat
iumenta apud eum stabulari. Lafaye (Daremberg-Saglio iv 1448) says:
"Il est probable que les clients du stabulum se contentaient souvent d'y
remiser leurs bêtes et leurs voitures les jours de marché, comme on le fait
encore dans toutes les petites villes; eux-mêmes n'y couchaient pas; le
soir venu, ayant terminé leurs affaires, ils reprenaient avec leurs bêtes le
chemin de la campagne. Il y avait à côté de l'écurie un cabaret et aussi
quelques chambres pouvant servir en cas de nécessité; en un mot, le
stabulum, c'est par excellence l'auberge des rouliers, l'osteria qu'on
rencontre au bord des grandes routes, à l'entrée des villes." Suetonius
elsewhere uses stabulum for "stable" (Calig. 55, 2) and "brothel"
(Iul. 49, 1).
comis: Tacitus (H. i 52) states that comitas was one of the virtues
falsely attributed to Vitellius by his supporters, while sterner judges
pronounced him a man of low tastes: Et ut Vitellius apud severos humilis,
ita comitatem bonitatemque faventes vocabant, quod sine modo, sine
iudicio donaret sua, largiretur aliena; simul aviditate imperi dandi ipsa
vitia pro virtutibus interpretabantur.
iantassent: "breakfasted"; cf. Mart. viii '67, 10, Ut iantes, sero,
Caeciliane, venis: Isidor. or. xx 2, 10, Iantaculum est primus cibus quo
ieiunium solvitur, unde et nuncupatum. Nigidius: Nos ipsi ieiunia
iantaculis levibus solvimus. On the forms iento, ianto, from *ieiunto,
*iaiunto see Lindsay, Lat. Lang. p. 17; in the MSS. of Plautus iaiunus is
the best attested form. The iantaculum was usually taken during the
third or, at the latest, the fourth hour, and consisted of bread dipped in
wine or eaten with honey, dates, olives, or salt: sometimes fried cakes.
and cheese were used. (Marquardt, Privatl.2 265.)
CHAPTER 8.
castra ingressus: the careful inspection of the winter-quarters of
the legions in Lower Germany by Vitellius, the newly arrived legatus, is
described in Tac. H. i 52: Sub ipsas superioris anni (i.e. 68 A.D.) kalendas
Decembres Aulus Vitellius inferiorem Germaniam ingressus hiberna
legionum cum cura adierat. The winter-quarters of the First legion were
at Bonna (Bonn), of the Sixteenth at Novaesium (Neuss), and of the
Fifth and Fifteenth at Castra Vetera (Xanten, below Wesel), which was
the chief military centre of the province (see on c. 7, 1).
ultro dempsit: cf. Tac. (l.c.): Redditi plerisque ordines, remissa
ignominia, adlevatae notae; plura ambitione, quaedam iudicio, in quibus
sordes et avaritiam Fontei Capitonis (the late commander, see Galb. 11)
adimendis adsignandisve militiae ordinibus integre mutaverat. The
centurions who had openly declared their adhesion to the cause of Nero
and Verginius Rufus, and thus compromised themselves in relation to
Galba, had been degraded and were now reinstated.
ignominiosis: = ignominia notatis. Some of the ignominiae or notae,
i.e. degrading punishments inflicted for military offences, are described in
Aug. 24, 2, Centuriones statione deserta, itidem ut manipulares, capitali
animadversione puniit, pro cetero delictorum genere variis ignominiis
adfecit, ut stare per totum diem iuberet ante praetorium (the general's
quarters), interdum tunicatos discinctosque, nonnumquam cum decempedis
(ten-foot poles) vel etiam caespitem portantes: Val. Max. ii 7, 9,
L. Calpurnius Piso consul, cum in Sicilia bellum adversus fugitivos gereret,
et C. Titius, equitum praefectus, fugitivorum multitudine circumventus
arma iis tradidisset, his praefectum ignominiae generibus adfecit. Iussit
eum toga laciniis abscissis amictum, discinctaque tunica indutum, nudis
pedibus, a mane in noctem usque ad principia per omne tempus militiae
adesse; interdixit etiam ei convictum hominum, usumque balnearum:
Frontin. Strateg. iv 1, 26, 27, 28. See Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 572.
sordes: ''mourning garb." It was a regular artifice for an accused
person (reus) to appear in public unwashed and unkempt (squalidus), clad
in mean and soiled apparel (sordidatus); cf. Quintil. vi 1, 33, At sordes et
squalorem et propinquorum quoque similem habitum scio profuisse: Cic.
Cluent. 18, squalore huius et sordibus laetatur (where see Ramsay). So
sordes is used in describing those who have a trial hanging over their
heads; e.g. Cic. Att. i 16, satius esse illum (Clodium) in infamia relinqui
ac sordibus quam infirmo iudicio committi: Suet. Aug. 32, 2, diuturnorum
reorum et ex quorum sordibus nihil aliud quam voluptas inimicis quaereretur
nomina abolevit.
vixdum mense transacto: Vitellius had taken over command in Lower
Germany about Dec. 1, 68 A.D.; on the evening of Jan. 1, 69, while dining
at Cologne he received news that two legions (iv and xxii) in Upper
Germany had refused to renew the oath of allegiance to Galba. He made
known this news to his army, and on the following day Fabius Valens,
the legatus of the First legion, with the cavalry of that legion and of
the auxiliaries appeared at Cologne and greeted him as Imperator (Tac.
H. i 56, 57).
neque diei
ratione habita: the days following the Kalends, the
Nones, and the Ides were "black" (atri) or unlucky days for beginning
an enterprise; cf. Macrob. Sat. i 16, 21, dies autem postriduanos ad omnia
maiores nostri cavendos putarunt, quos etiam atros velut infausta appellatione damnarunt: ib. 15, 22, omnes autem postriduani dies seu post
Kalendas sive post Nonas Idusve ex aequo atri sunt: Gell. v 17: Varr.
L.L. vi 4, 29: Liv. vi 1, 12. In the Fasti Praenest. the 2nd of Jan. is:
marked as a “dies religiosus, ut sunt dies postridie omnes Kalendas, quod
iis sacrificium non fit."
temporis: 'the time of the day," explained by the following ac
iam vespere.
in veste domestica: cf. Claud. 17, 3, in veste palmata: Oth. 12, 1, in
lintea veste: Ner. 25, 1, in veste purpurea. Suetonius, like other post-Aug. authors, uses in c. abl. (cf. ἐν) or the simple abl. (e.g. Iul. 6, 2,
muliebri veste) in describing dress, where the best prose writers prefer
сит. For “vestis domestica,” common clothes worn in the house, cf.
Aug. 73, veste non temere alia quam domestica usus est, ab sorore et uxore
et filia neptibusque confecta: Sen. Tranq. i 5, placet non ex arcula
prolata vestis .. sed domestica et vilis, nec servata nec sumenda sollicite:
Cic. Fin. ii 24, 77, aut etiam, ut vestitum, sic sententiam habeas aliam
domesticam, aliam forensem, ut in fronte ostentatio sit, intus veritas
occultetur. The garments worn out of doors were called “forensia” or
““vestis forensis”; cf. Aug. 73, Et forensia autem et calceos numquam
non intra cubiculum habuit ad subitos repentinosque casus parata: Calig.
17, 2, posteriore epulo forensia viris distribuit. Among the equipment
provided by Alexander Severus for provincial governors (praesides provinciarum) were “vestes forenses binae, domesticae binae, balneares
singulares" (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 42).
imperator est consalutatus: cf. Galb. 10, 1: Tac. H. i 57, Proxima
legionis primae hiberna erant et promptissimus e legatis Fabius Valens.
Is die proximo (Jan. 2) coloniam Agrippinensem cum equitibus legionis
auxiliariorumque ingressus imperatorem Vitellium consalutavit. Secutae
ingenti certamine eiusdem provinciae (i.e. Lower Germany) legiones.
per celeberrimos vicos: the most crowded streets or quarters of
Colonia Agrippinensis itself. vicos is explained as "villages" or "towns"
by Rolfe, Thomson-Forester, Clarke, and Holland (who however gives
"streets" as an alternative rendering).
gladium tenens: the dagger (pugio) or sword was one of the insignia
assumed by a new emperor; see on Galb. 11.
detractum delubro Martis: cf. c. 10, 3, where Vitellius dedicates at
the same shrine of Mars in Cologne the sword with which Otho had
slain himself.
§ 2. praetorium: the general's quarters in the camp; see on "principia,” Oth. 1, 2.
flagrante triclinio ex conceptu camini: these words are difficult:
Stahr translates, "als das Speisezimmer durch Ansteckung eines Kamins
in Flammen stand"; Rolfe, "the dining-room caught fire from the stove
and was ablaze"; but it is doubtful if ex conceptu camini could mean
"owing to a catching fire, or an ignition, caused by the stove." The only
other passage where the subst. "conceptus" is used of fire seems to be
Plin. N.H. xvi 208, Teritur lignum ligno ignemque concipit attritu,
excipiente materia aridi fomitis ("tinder''), fungi vel foliorum facillimo
conceptu, i.e. the fungi and leaves most readily ignite; on the analogy
of this, "conceptus camini'' should mean that the fireplace, or rather
the chimney, itself caught fire (and so set fire to the room). The caminus
was a fireplace, often arched in shape, fitted with a chimney (‘chimney"
comes through “cheminée” from caminus), and was fed with logs. Its
use in the winter-quarters of troops is mentioned in Cic. Fam. vii 10, metuo
ne frigeas in hibernis; quamobrem camino luculento utendum censeo.
Sidonius (Ep. ii 2) mentions its use for heating dining-rooms in winter:
in hiemale triclinium venitur, quod arcuatili camino saepe ignis animatus
pulla fuligine infecit ("a roaring fire on an arched hearth often fills it with
smoke and smuts." Dalton). For ante
quam with the participle see
on Galb. 11, prius quam.. oppressis.
..
cum quidem inquit: for this use of cum quidem introducing a
memorable utterance on a certain occasion cf. Iul. 50, 2, cum quidem
plerisque vilitatem mirantibus facetissime Cicero: “Quo melius,” inquit,
“emptum sciatis, tertia deducta” (“It's a better bargain than you think,
for a third has been knocked off the price'"): Cic. Sen. 4, 11, cum quidem
Salinatori, qui amisso oppido fugerat in arcem, glorianti atque ita dicenti:
“Mea opera, Q. Fabi, Tarentum recepisti”; “Certe," inquit ridens,
“nam nisi tu amisisses, numquam recepissem.” See Draeger, Hist.
Synt. ii 568.
omine adverso: Frontinus, Strateg. i 12 (a chapter entitled “De dissolvendo metu quem milites ex adversis conceperint ominibus''), gives many
historical examples of commanders promptly construing unfavourable
omens as favourable; e.g., Epaminondas, cum fax de caelo nocte delapsa
eos qui adverterunt terruisset: ‘“Lumen,” inquit, “hoc numina ostendunt.'"
Chabrias Atheniensis classe dimicaturus, excusso ante navem
ipsius fulmine, exterritis per tale prodigium militibus: ‘“Nunc,” inquit,
““potissimum ineunda pugna est, cum deorum maximus Iuppiter adesse
numen suum classi nostrae ostendit."
adluxit: this impersonal use (cf. illucescit) is only found here. A. А.
Howard (Harvard Studies x 28) plausibly suggests that Bono animo estote!
nobis adluxit is a quotation from some tragedy, and he would complete
the line as an iambic senarius by the addition of deus.
consentiente superioris provinciae exercitu: cf. Tac. H. i 57, Et
superior (= superioris provinciae) exercitus speciosis senatus populique
Romani nominibus relictis tertium nonas Ianuarias (i.e. Jan. 3) Vitellio
accessit: scires illum priore biduo non penes rem publicam fuisse (i.e.
it had not been under the control of or subject to the Republic, though
on Jan. 1 the legions, iv and xxii, stationed at Moguntiacum, when required
to renew the oath of fealty to Galba, dashed down his images and swore
allegiance to the senate and the Roman people, i.e. the Republic; see on
Galb. 16, 2): Plut. Galb. 22, Εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τὸ μετὰ Φλάκκου (i.e. Hordeonius
Flaccus, commander in Upper Germany) στράτευμα τοὺς καλοὺς ἐκείνους καὶ
δημοκρατικοὺς εἰς σύγκλητον (senatum) ὅρκους ἀφέντες ὤμοσαν Οὐϊτελλίῳ τῷ
αὐτοκράτορι (imperatori) ποιήσειν τὸ προστασσόμενον.
cognomen Germanici ..recepit: Tac. H. i 62, nomen Germanici Vitellio
statim additum. Plutarch (l.c.) says that for some days previously Vitellius
had seemed to dread the weight of sovereign power and to decline it, but
on the day when Fabius Valens and the cavalry saluted him as imperator
he had been entertaining his officers at a great banquet from midday, and
replete with food and drink he went out to them and accepted the title of
"Germanicus." For his mother's refusal to recognize her son Vitellius
under the name “Germanicus" see on c. 3, 2.
(cognomen) Augusti distulit: Tac. H. ii 62, praemisit in urbem
edictum, quo vocabulum Augusti differret, Caesaris non reciperet, cum de
potestate nihil detraheret (i.e. though he relinquished nothing of his actual
powers). The senate, on the receipt of the news of the defeat and death
of Otho and the acceptance of Vitellius by the city soldiery, had at once
decreed to him all the customary honours, the tribunician power, the title
of Augustus, etc. (H. ii 55). He was constrained by the people to accept
the title of "Augustus" on the day after he made his imposing entry
into Rome in Aug. 69 A.D.; H. ii 90, abnuentique nomen Augusti expressere,
ut adsumeret, tam frustra quam recusaverat. Vitellius reckoned the first
day of his reign (dies imperii) to be April 19, 69 A.D., when he was
recognised by the senate; Vespasian reckoned his dies imperii to be the
day on which he was first proclaimed by the legions in Egypt (see
Vesp. 6, 3).
(cognomen) Caesaris in perpetuum recusavit: cf. Plut. (l.c.) φασὶν (τὸν
Οὐϊτέλλιον) ..
προελθεῖν καὶ ὑπακοῦσαι Γερμανικὸν ὄνομα θεμένων αὐτῷ, τὸ δὲ
Καίσαρος οὐ προσδεξάμενον. Tacitus mentions that Vitellius at first declined
the title (see H. ii 62, quoted in preceding note, and i 62 Caesarem se
appellari etiam victor prohibuit); but he also states that Vitellius afterwards, when the Flavian forces were advancing on Rome, expressed a
wish to be saluted as "Caesar': iii 58, quin et Caesarem se dici voluit,
aspernatus antea; sed tunc superstitione nominis (“a superstitious feeling
about the name''), et quia in metu consilia prudentium et vulgi rumor iuxta
audiuntur. In the Acta Fratr. Arv. he appears as "Vitellius Germanicus
Imperator'' (C.I.L. vi 2051, Henzen Act. Fr. Arv. xcii sqq.). On his
earlier coins he is styled "A. Vitellius Imperator Germanicus"; on the
later the title "Augustus" is added. On some Alexandrian coins his name
appears as Ώλος (= Aulus) Οὐιτ. Καισ. Σεβ. (Σεβαστός = Augustus) Γερμ. αὐτ.
(αὐτοκράτωρ Imperator). It is probable that these coins were struck
before the news that Vitellius had rejected the title of "Caesar" reached
the provinces (Eckhel, vi 309).
=
CHAPTER 9.
caede Galbae: described in Galb. 19 and 20. Tacitus (H. i 64) says
that Valens (see next note) was already on his march when he received
the news of Galba's death: Nuntium de caede Galbae et imperio Othonis
Fabius Valens in civitate Leucorum (in N.E. Gaul, on the Moselle) accepit.
Nec militum animus in gaudium aut formidine permotus: bellum volvebat.
partitus est copias: Suetonius mentions only the division of the forces
of Vitellius into those sent in advance and those with which he followed
in person; the further division of the advance forces is described in Tac.
H. i 61. Vitellius decided that there were to be two generals and two
lines of march. Fabius Valens was ordered to advance through Gaul
(winning it over or, if necessary, ravaging it) and to invade Italy by way
of the Cottian Alps, the chain which divides Dauphiné from Piedmont,
with the pass over Mont Genèvre where Pompey and later Augustus had
made a military road. Aulus Caecina was to take the nearer route coming
down through Switzerland into Italy by the Pennine Alps, over the Great
St. Bernard pass from Martigny to Aosta. To Valens were entrusted the
picked troops of the army of Lower Germany, including the main part of
the Fifth legion, detachments from legions i, xv, and xvi, and the auxiliary
infantry and cavalry, the total force numbering about 40,000 men.
Caecina led 30,000 from the army of Upper Germany, the flower of his
force being the 21st legion, called Rapax. Vitellius followed later with
about 60,000 men, comprising the strength of the Germanic armies and
some 8000 who had been sent from Britain.
laetum evenit auspicium: mentioned also in Tac. H. i 62: Laetum
augurium, Fabio Valenti exercituique, quem in bellum agebat, ipso profectionis die aquila leni meatu, prout agmen incederet, velut dux viae
praevolavit; longumque per spatium is gaudentium militum clamor, ea
quies interritae alitis fuit, ut haud dubium magnae et prosperae rei omen
acciperetur. A similar favourable omen preluded a great victory of
Germanicus over Arminius; cf. Tac. A. ii 17 Interea pulcherrimum
augurium, octo (i.e. one for each of the 8 legions) aquilae petere silvas
et intrare visae imperatorem advertere. Exclamat irent, sequerentur
Romanas aves, propria legionum numina.
lustratis: = circu(m)itis. lustrare primarily meant "to purify," and
as the purification was often effected by processions round a place or by
the priest going round the persons to be purified and sprinkling them with
water, lustrare came to be used in the sense of circu(m)ire and also of
peragrare; e.g. Aen. x 224, adgnoscunt (Nymphae) longe regem, lustrantque (= circumnatant) choreis: ib. vii 391, te (Bacchum) lustrare choro
(= circum te saltare): Cic. Fin. v 87, Pythagoras Aegyptum lustravit.
antecessit: cf. Curt. iv 7, 15, corvi modico volatu prima signa antecedentes et modo humi residebant, cum lentius agmen incederet, modo se
pennis levabant ducentium iterque monstrantium ritu: Vell. Pat. i 4, 1,
classis cursum esse directum columbae antecedentis volatu ferunt.
ipso movente: for movere used absolutely, in the sense of moveri or
se movere, cf. Calig. 13, ut a Miseno movit: Iul. 60, cum minime quis
moturum putaret: Liv. xxxvii 28, 4, postquam movisse a Samo Romanos
audivit: Cic. Att. ix 1, 1, postquam ille Canusio moverat (where see Tyrrell
and Purser, who rightly deny that there is an ellipse of castra).
plurifariam: cf. Aug. 46 and 80; Tib. 43, 2; Calig. 54, 1; Claud. 21,
4; Ner. 24, 23; not found in any earlier writer. Suetonius also uses multifariam in many places" (e.g. Galb. 19, 1); bifariam "in two places"
(Aug. 100, 3); trifariam, quadrifariam ‘“in three (four) parts" (Vitell.
13, 1). Other similar adverbs collected by Neue, Formenlehre ii 677, are
alifariam, aliquotfariam, ambifariam, omnifariam, septifariam. All such
forms are Acc. Sg. Fem. of adjs. in -fārius; cf. Gr. -φάσιος from -φατιος,
e.g. τριφάσιος (Lindsay, Lat. Lang. p. 552).
corruerunt: so when Julius Caesar was setting out for the senate on
the fatal Ides of March, an image of him in the vestibule of his house
fell down of its own accord and was shattered (Dio xliv 18). Before
Nero's death exornati Lares in ipso sacrificii apparatu conciderunt
(Ner. 46, 2).
..
laurea excidit: see on Galb. 18, 3, sacrificanti coronam de capite
excidisse. Vitellius offered sacrifice when the expedition was setting out.
Suetonius uses either laurea corona (Iul. 45, 2; 79, 1; Tib. 69) or laurea
by itself (as in Dom. 6, 1; etc.).
in profluentem: sc. aquam. For this ellipse cf. Cic. Inv. ii 149, dum
culeus, in quem coniectus in profluentem deferretur, compararetur: Auct.
ad Herenn. i 23, Et lex: qui parentem necasse iudicatus erit, ut is obvolutus
et obligatus corio devehatur in profluentem: Flor. i 1, abiectus in profluentem: id. iv 12, arma in profluentes data. The full phrase aqua
profluens occurs in Cic. Q. Fratr. iii 1. The ellipse of aqua with frigida,
calida, etc., is common.
Viennae: Vienna, mod. Vienne, was on the Rhone, in the province of
Gallia Narbonensis. It had been the capital of the Allobroges, and seems
to have been made a Roman colony under Caligula. The fierce rivalry and
enmity which existed between it and Lugdunum (Lyons), on the opposite
bank of the Rhone, are described in Tac. H. i 65.
pro tribunali: see on Vesp. 7, 2.
gallinaceus: used absolutely (as in Plin. N.H., and Columella) for
gallus gallinaceus (Plaut., Cic., etc.) "a poultry-cock." It is fortunate
that Suetonius explains in c. 18 what was portended by the strange occurrence mentioned here, as otherwise we should have been at a loss to divine
it. Cf. the story of the hen (gallina) in Galb. 1.
supra umerum astitit: though the cock perching on his shoulder
and head was an omen of doom to Vitellius, an eagle lighting on the
shoulder or head was regarded as a sign of coming power; cf. Claud. 7,
evenit ut primitus ingredienti cum fascibus (i.e. as consul) Forum praetervolans aquila dexteriore umero consideret: Lact. Inst. i 11, 65, consedisse
(Iovi) aquilam in capite atque ei regnum portendisse. Valerius Maximus
(v 6, 4) tells a curious tale of a bird lighting on the head of Q. Aelius
Paetus when he was administering justice as praetor: Cui ius dicenti
cum in capite picus consedisset haruspexque affirmasset, conservato eo fore
domus ipsius statum felicissimum, reipublicae miserrimum; occiso, in contrarium utrumque cessurum: e vestigio picum morsu suo in conspectu
senatus necavit.
ostentis par respondit exitus: cf. Liv. ix 15, Papirio quoque brevi ad
spem eventus respondit: Cic. Div. ii 24, 52, quae (responsa haruspicum)
aut nullos habuerint exitus aut contrarios.
legatos suos: Aulus Caecina and Fabius Valens, who defeated the
forces of Otho at Betriacum. For the career of Caecina see on Tit. 6, 2.
Valens was appointed by Nero to command the 1st legion in Germany,
and after Galba's accession he put to death Fonteius Capito (see Galb. 11),
governor of Lower Germany, alleging that he was plotting revolution.
Thinking this service insufficiently rewarded by Galba, he persuaded
Vitellius to seize the empire. When Vitellius reached Rome, Valens and
Caecina were made consuls (Sept., 69 A.D.). They were sent from Rome
against the advancing forces of Vespasian. Valens was delayed in starting,
and when he heard of the rout of the rest of the Vitellian army by
Antonius Primus, he tried to cross over by sea to Gaul, to rouse that
province for Vitellius, but was captured and shortly afterwards executed.
Tacitus denounces in the strongest terms the profligacy, venality, and
cruelty of Valens (H. i 66, ii 56, iii 62).
CHAPTER 10.
Betriacensi victoria: see Oth. 9, 2 and notes.
Othonis exitu: see Oth. 11.
cum adhuc in Gallia esset: Dio lxv 1 (Zon. xi 16), ὄντι δ' ἐν τῇ Γαλατίᾳ
ὁ θάνατος ἠγγέλθη τοῦ Ὄθωνος. Vitellius was still on the road to Lugdunum
when he heard the tidings; cf. Tac. H. ii 57, Interim Vitellius victoriae
suae nescius ut ad integrum bellum reliquas Germanici exercitus vires
trahebat. Pauci veterum militum in hibernis relicti, festinatis per Gallias
dilectibus, ut remanentium legionum nomina supplerentur. Cura ripae (i.e.
the left bank of the Rhine) Hordeonio Flacco permissa: ipse e Britannico
exercitu delecta octo milia sibi adiunxit. Et paucorum dierum iter progressus prosperas apud Bedriacum res ac morte Othonis concidisse bellum
accepit.
quicquid: see on Galb. 1.
praetorianarum cohortium: for their history and organisation see on
Tit. 4, 2. Though disbanded by Vitellius they took service again to
support Vespasian; cf. Tac. H. ii 67, Proximus Vitellio e praetoriis
cohortibus metus erat. Separati primum, deinde addito honestae missionis
lenimento, arma ad tribunos suos deferebant, donec motum a Vespasiano
bellum crebresceret: tum resumpta militia robur Flavianarum partium
fuere.
Vitellius enrolled 16 new praetorian cohorts when Vespasian's
forces were advancing (Tас. Н. ii 93).
ut pessimi exempli: by reason of their desertion of Galba and their
appointment of Otho as emperor without the authority of the senate
and people. For pessimi exempli cf. Aug. 32, 1, pleraque pessimi
exempli
exstiterant: Plin. Ep. x 97, Sine auctore propositi
libelli (i.e. anonymous accusations) in nullo crimine locum habere
debent. Nam et pessimi exempli nec nostri saeculi est (i.e. "not in
accordance with the spirit of our times''). The abl. is also used by
Suetonius, Dom. 14, 4, utque domesticis persuaderet ne bono quidem
exemplo audendam esse patroni neceт.
exauctoravit: see on Vesp. 8, 2. This power belonged to the emperor
as head of the army (Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 854). Suetonius says nothing
of the praetorians having been granted the honesta missio which is mentioned by Tacitus (ii 67, quoted above); this would carry with it the
bounty of 20,000 sesterces granted to time-expired praetorians (Dio lv 23).
iussas tribunis tradere arma: Tac. (l.c.), arma ad tribunos suos deferebant. Their standard-bearers (signiferi) also handed over their standards,
and so Antonius Primus, the general of Vespasian, when he was exhorting
his forces to a fresh attack on the Vitellians, said to the praetorians (who
had taken service again with Vespasian): “illic (i.e. in the hands of the
Vitellians) signa armaque vestra sunt'' (Tac. H. iii 24).
libellos: "petitions"; see on Dom. 14, 4, Epaphroditum a libellis.
Plutarch (Galb. 27) mentions the 120 petitions (βιβλία) presented to Otho
by those who claimed to have taken part in the murders of Galba, Piso,
Laco, and Vinius. With reference to the great number of these claimants
Plut. neatly quotes the words of the poet Archilochus “ ἑπτὰ γὰρ νεκρῶν
πεσόντων, οὓς ἐμάρψαμεν ποσίν, | χίλιοι φονῆες ἐσμέν.”
conquiri et supplicio adfici: very similar words are used by Tacitus,
H. i 44: Plures quam centum viginti libellos praemium exposcentium ob
aliquam notabilem illa die operam Vitellius postea invenit, omnesque
conquiri et interfici iussit. For supplicium in the sense of "capital
punishment'' see on c. 14, 1.
egregie: cf. Galb. 14, 1, quanquam multa documenta egregii principis
daret.
magis ex natura: sc. sua; cf. Tib. 59, 1, magis naturae obtemperans
("more in obedience to his natural instincts'').
§ 2. ritu triumphantium vectus est: Tacitus (ii 59) says that it was
Junius Blaesus, governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, who first enabled Vitellius
to assume regal splendour: Ipse (Vitellius) Arare flumine devehitur nullo
principali paratu, sed vetere egestate conspicuus, donec Iunius Blaesus,
Lugdunensis Galliae rector, genere illustri, largus animo et par opibus,
circumdaret principi ministeria, comitaretur liberaliter.
flumina: the Arar (Saone) and the Rhodanus (Rhone).
delicatissimis navigiis: cf. Calig. 43, iter ingressus est confecitque
interdum adeo segniter delicateque (‘luxuriously") ut octophoro ("a litter
with eight bearers'') veheretur: Eumen. Paneg. Constantin. Aug. 13, delicata
fuit illa vectatio Principis otiosi: Cic. Att. ii 14, 1, delicatum convivium.
Casaubon compares the navis thalamegus (= cubiculata), the royal barge
fitted with staterooms, in which Cleopatra and Caesar sailed on the Nile
(Iul. 52).
variarum coronarum genere: Bentley's vario is approved by Ihm, but
the text is defended by Claud. 46, ex omnium magistratuum genere, and by
the many instances of similar transference (hypallage) of the epithet belonging to genus which are collected in Thes. Ling. Lat. vi 1906.
redimitis: cf. Curt. iv 4, 5, navigia conscendunt redimita coronis
floribusque: Ov. Am. iii 11, 29, puppis redimita corona: Sil. Ital. Pun.
xi 484, lauro redimita subibat | optatos puppis portus.
profusissimos: see on Tit. 7, 1.
obsoniorum: see on Dom. 4. 5.
apparatus: cf. Tac. H. ii 62, epularum foeda et inexplebilis libido:
ex urbe atque Italia inritamenta gulae gestabantur, strepentibus ab utroque
mari itineribus; exhausti conviviorum apparatibus principes civitatum;
vastabantur ipsae civitates; degenerabat a labore ac virtute miles adsuetudine voluptatum et contemptu ducis. See on Dom. 4, 1.
nulla disciplina: Tac. c. 68, apud Vitellium omnia indisposita,
temulenta, pervigiliis ac bacchanalibus quam disciplinae et castris propiora:
c. 69, et vires (militum) luxu corrumpebantur contra veterem disciplinam
et instituta maiorum. The outrages committed by the followers of Vitellius
are denounced by Tac. in c. 56: Ceterum Italia gravius atque atrocius
quam bello adflictabatur. Dispersi per municipia et colonias Vitelliani
spoliare, rapere, vi et stupris polluere: in omne fas nefasque avidi aut
venales non sacro, non profano abstinebant. Ipsique milites regionum
gnari refertos agros, dites dominos in praedam, aut, si repugnatum foret,
ad excidium destinabant, obnoxiis ducibus et prohibere non ausis. Cf. ib.
71, 87.
petulantiam: in Ner. 26, 1, Suet. describes the petulantia of Nero who
went about the streets like a footpad (grassator) at night: Petulantiam...
exercuit,.. redeuntes a cena verberare ac repugnantes vulnerare cloacisque demergere assuerat, tabernas etiam effringere et expilare. Juvenal
(iii 278 sqq.) gives a similar description of the wantonness of a drunken
bully (ebrius ac petulans).
in iocum vertens: cf. Aug. 67, 1, rem in iocum vertit: Liv. v 14, in
religionem vertentes: Tac. H. i 86, in prodigium et omen vertebatur:
Aristoph. Vesp. 1260, ἐς γέλων τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽ ἔτρεψας.
in libertatem asserebant: see on Vesp. 3.
repraesentantes: see on Oth. 5, 2. Holland renders: "they paid as
many as withstood them with whipping-cheer, blows, knocks, bloody wounds
oftentimes, yea and otherwhiles with present death.”
§ 3. campos adit: Tacitus (H. ii 70) gives a vivid account of the
visit of Vitellius to Bedriacum: Inde Vitellius Cremonam flexit et spectato
munere (gladiatorial show'') Caecinae insistere Bedriacensibus campis
ac vestigia recentis victoriae lustrare oculis concupivit. Foedum atque
atrox spectaculum intra quadragensimum pugnae diem: lacera corpora,
trunci artus, putres virorum equorumque formae, infecta tabo humus,
protritis arboribus ac frugibus dira vastitas, etc. Cf. Dio lxv 1, ὁ Οὐιτέλλιος δὲ εἶδεν ἐν Λουγδούνῳ μονομάχων (gladiatorum) ἀγῶνας καὶ ἐν Κρεμώνῃ· ὥσπερ
οὐκ ἀρκοῦντος τοῦ πλήθους τῶν ἐν ταῖς μάχαις ἀπολωλότων, καὶ τότε καὶ ἔτι ἀτάφων
ἐρριμμένων, ὡς καὶ αὐτὸς ἐθεάσατο, διεξῆλθε γὰρ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ χωρίου ἐν ᾧ ἔκειντο
ἐμπιμπλάμενος τῆς θέας, ὥσπερ τότε νικῶν, καὶ οὐκ ἐκέλευσέ σφας οὐδ᾽ ὡς ταφῆναι.
For adit perf. cf. petit, Oth. 7, 1.
abhorrentes tabem: for abhorrere c. acc. see on Galb. 4, 2. Vitellius
displayed a callous insensibility to the awful spectacle; cf. Tac. (l.c.),
erant quos varia sors rerum lacrimaeque et misericordia subiret; at non
Vitellius flexit oculos nec tot milia (40,000, Dio lxiv 10) insepultorum
civium exhorruit, laetus ultro et tam propinquae sortis ignarus instaurabat
sacrum dis loci.
detestabili voce: Tacitus does not give this particular utterance of
Vitellius at Bedriacum, but in describing the death of Blaesus (see c. 14, 2
infr.) he cites one of similar brutality: H. iii 39, Quin et audita est
saevissima Vitellii vox, qua se (ipsa enim verba referam) pavisse oculos
spectata inimici morte iactavit.
..
optime olere et melius: this form of expression by which a comparative expresses a higher degree of a quality than a superlative is not
uncommon in Latin; e.g. Cic. Off. iii 121, Tibi persuade esse te quidem mihi
carissimum, sed multo fore cariorem, si talibus praeceptis laetabere: id.
Fam. xiv 3, 2, Ego hoc miserior sum quam tu, quae es miserrima: id.
Marcell. 33, Maximas tibi omnes gratias agimus, maiores etiam habemus:
Liv. iii 72, ne pessimum facinus peiore exemplo admitterent: Apul. Met.
x 12, servus nequissimus atque mulier nequior. Kühner-Stegmann (ii 481)
give the title "elative" to the use of the superlative to denote merely a
very high degree.
et: Ernesti suggested at, G. Becker set (sed).
nec eo setius: see on Tit. 5, 3.
lapidem memoriae Othonis inscriptum: the soldiers buried the remains
of Otho in a simple tomb, with no splendid monument, and no boastful
inscription; cf. Tac. H. ii 49, Othoni sepulchrum extructum est modicum
et mansurum. Plutarch visited the tomb and thus describes it (Oth. 18):
κρύψαντες δὲ τῇ γῇ τὰ λείψανα τοῦ ῎Οθωνος οὔτε μεγέθει σήματος οὔτ᾽ ἐπιγραφῆς ὄγκῳ
("pomp of epitaph ") τὸν τάφον ἐποίησαν ἐπίφθονον. Εἶδον δὲ ἐν Βριξίλλῳ γενόμενος
καὶ μνῆμα μέτριον καὶ τὴν ἐπιγραφὴν οὕτως ἔχουσαν, εἰ μεταφρασθείη· “ Δαίμοσι Μάρκου
Ὄθωνος.” (Δαίμοσι = Dis Manibus is a probable correction by Lobeck of
Δήλωσει “for the pointing out of Marcus Otho." Hardy ad loc. says
"It is difficult to see of what Latin formula Δηλώσει Μάρκου Όθωνος could
be the translation. It could hardly be “Memoriae M. Othonis,” as δηλώσει
would not be the natural rendering of this, and, besides, this form of dedication was not in use before the end of the 2nd century. See Wilm. 244.'")
Mausoleo: see on Vesp. 23, 4; the word, of course, is used derisively
by Vitellius.
pugionem
misit. dedicandum: swords and daggers were frequently dedicated to the gods in their temples: Caligula dedicated to
Mars Ultor three swords of his would-be assassins (Calig. 24, 3); Nero
dedicated to Jupiter Vindex the dagger of Scaevinus, who was involved in
the conspiracy of Piso against Nero (Tac. A. xv 74); Caracalla dedicated
the sword with which he slew his own brother (Dio lxxiii 4); the Arverni
dedicated a dagger which they claimed to have captured from Julius
Caesar in Gaul (Plut. Caes. 26).
Agrippinensem coloniam: Cologne (Köln), where Vitellius had been
first saluted as emperor (c. 8, 1). The original name of the town was
"Oppidum Ubiorum" (Tac. A. i 36). The Ubii, a German tribe on the
E. of the Rhine, were induced (c. 38 в.с.) by M. Vipsanius Agrippa to
cross and settle on the left bank to avoid the attacks of the Chatti.
Agrippina, grand-daughter of this Agrippa, daughter of Germanicus, and
wife of Claudius, was born in this town and she persuaded Claudius to
plant a colony of veterans there (51. A.D.); from that time the place was
called after her "Colonia. Agrippinensis" (Tac. A. xii 27; see also
Furneaux on Tac. Germ. 28).
Marti: from the same shrine of Mars at Cologne had been taken the
sword of Julius Caesar which was presented to Vitellius when he was
acclaimed emperor; see c. 8, 1.
in Appennini iugis: from Cremona Vitellius went to Bononia (Tac.
H. ii 71) which lies immediately at the foot of the Apennines; there was
a pass across the Apennines traversed by the modern highroad from Bologna
(Bononia) to Florence (Florentia), and Vitellius may have crossed by this
pass and then proceeded by the Via Cassia to Rome; see Hofstee ad loc.
pervigilium: see on Galb. 4, 3. This pervigilium of Vitellius was
nominally a religious thanksgiving for his victory over Otho, but presumably
it took the form of those all-night orgies (pervigilia ac bacchanalia) of
which Tacitus speaks so contemptuously in H. ii 69 (quoted above on ‘nulla
disciplina''). Caligula, according to Suet. Calig. 54, ordered a pervigilium for the sole purpose of taking advantage of the licence of the
occasion to make an auspicious first appearance on the stage: Nec alia
de causa videtur eo die, quo periit, pervigilium indixisse quam ut initium
in scaenam prodeundi licentia temporis auspicaretur. Dessau (Gesch.
röm. Kaiserzeit ii 1, 338) thinks it probable that the pervigilium of Vitellius
took place at the temple of Jupiter Appenninus, which was at the highest
point of the pass by which the Via Flaminia crossed the Apennines.
CHAPTER 11.
classicum: classicum primarily meant a signal given by the trumpet
(classicum appellatur quod buccinatores per cornu dicunt, Veget. ii 22),
and at times denoted the trumpet itself. As a signal the classicum seems
to have been given by all the trumpeters together (e.g. as a signal for
battle) and it was always given in the presence of the commander-in-chief
(imperator) and by his orders. See Daremberg-Saglio, i 753.
paludatus: Tacitus is probably right in stating that Vitellius laid
aside the paludamentum (see on Galb. 11) and assumed the toga praetexta
before entering the city, to avoid entering it as a conqueror: H. ii 89,
Ipse Vitellius a ponte Mulvio (2 miles N. of Rome) insigni equo, paludatus
accinctusque senatum ac populum ante se agens, quo minus ut captam
urbem ingrederetur, amicorum consilio deterritus, sumpta praetexta et
composito agmine incessit. Alexander Severus on his accession made a
similar concession to established usage by assuming the toga and entering
the city on foot (Dio lxxiv 1). The theory of Heraeus (on Tac. l.c.) is
that Vitellius wore military garb when entering by the Porta Flaminia
(which was extra pomerium and therefore ad urbem), but donned the toga
before passing through the Porta Carmentalis (?) into the city itself, and
that Suetonius, prone to exaggerate, describes him as paludatus when
entering the city. One of the coins in honour of his entry represents him
as togatus, another as paludatus.
signa atque vexilla: the signa were the standards of the maniples (see
on Galb. 12, 2); the vexilla here mentioned are probably the standards of
the cavalry, as in Tac. H. ii 18, 43, and other passages where we find the
two words joined.
sagulatis: the form sagulatus is only found here; sagatus (Cic., etc.)
occurs in Iul. 48. The sagum, or cloak, of the ordinary soldier was known
as the sagum (sagulum) gregale (e.g. Liv. vii 34), more rarely as paludamentum (e.g. Liv. i 26); the cleak of the officers was also called sagum
(Sall. Hist. ii frag. 21) but more frequently sagulum (e.g. Suet. Aug. 26, 1:
Val. Max. iii 2, 21); it differed from that of the private by its brighter
colour; the sagulum of the commander-in-chief, which was usually called
paludamentum, was, as a rule, scarlet or purple (sometimes white): cf.
Sil. Ital. Pun. iv 516, umeroque refulget | sanguinei patrium saguli decus:
ib. xvii 526, umeris imponit honorem | fulgentis saguli: Auct. Bell. Afr. 57,
cum Scipio sagulo purpureo uti solitus esset: Val. Max. i 6, 11, сит
in proelium exeuntibus album aut purpureum (paludamentum) dari soleret.
comitibus: “staff” “suite"; see on Vesp. 4, 4.
commilitonum: this is cited in the Thes. Ling. Lat. among the
passages where commilito (“evanida vi praepositionis'") is nearly
synonymous with miles gregarius; cf. Curt. vi 11, 2: Apul. Met. ix 39:
Macer Dig. xlix, 16, 12. Julius Caesar addressed his soldiers by the
blandius nomen of commilitones (Iul. 67). After the civil wars Augustus
never did so, and he forbade the use of the term by his sons and stepsons
who held military commands, regarding it as undignified and subversive
of discipline (Aug. 25). But when the Julio-Claudian line ended with
Nero, the emperors became much more dependent on the soldiers, and
freely addressed them as commilitones; cf. Galb. 20, 1 and Tac. H. i 35
(quoted on Galb. 19, 2). See Hardy on Plin. Ep. x 19 and 20, where Pliny
as governor of Bithynia asks Trajan whether he should use publici servi
or milites to guard prisoners, and Trajan replies: ‘“Nihil opus est ad
continendas custodias plures commilitones converti.”
§2. divino humanoque iure neglecto: cf. Tac. H. ii 91, adeo omnis
humani divinique iuris expers pari libertorum, amicorum socordia, velut
inter temulentos agebat: Dio lxv 2, αὐτὸς δὲ τῇ τε τρυφῇ καὶ τῇ ἀσελγείᾳ
προσκείμενος οὐδὲν ἔτι τῶν ἄλλων οὔτε τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων οὔτε τῶν θείων ἐφρόντιζεν.
Alliensi die: July 18, the day on which in 390 B.C. the Romans
suffered a disastrous defeat from the Gauls under Brennus at the Allia, a
tributary of the Tiber, 11 miles N. of Rome. On the same day in 477 B.C.
the 300 Fabii were annihilated at the Cremera (another tributary of the
Tiber) by the Veientes. Cf. Tac. H. ii 91, Apud civitatem cuncta interpretantem funesti ominis loco acceptum est, quod maximum pontificatum
adeptus Vitellius de caerimoniis publicis xv kalendas Augustas edixisset
antiquitus infausto die Cremerensi Alliensique cladibus. The dies Alliensis
became for ever a dies religiosus at Rome; cf. Liv. vi 1, De diebus religiosis
agitari coeptum, diemque a.d. quintum decimum Kal. Sextiles, duplici clade
insignem a posteriore clade Alliensem appellarunt insignemque religione rei ullius publice privatimque agendae fecerunt: Cic. Att. ix 5.
...
pontificatum maximum: see on Tit. 9, 1.
comitia in decem annos ordinavit: Tac. H. iii 55, ipse
festinare
comitia, quibus consules in multos annos destinabat. For ordinavit see on
Vesp. 23, 2. The naming of magistrates for several years in advance had
been first done by the dictator Julius Caesar; Iul. 76, 3, Eadem licentia
spreto patrio more magistratus in plures annos ordinavit. Though the
senate nominally had the right of choice, the emperor under the Lex de
imperio had the right of commendatio of his own candidates (candidati
Caesaris) for a certain number of places (e.g. 2 out of 20 quaestors, 4 out
of 12 praetors; see Furneaux, Tac. Ann. Introd. c. vi); these candidates:
were elected as a matter of course. The emperor also claimed a wider
right of nominatio to all vacant posts, and as those "nominated" by him
were sure of the preference, the elections became a mere farce. Vitellius
however at the elections in July 69 went through the pretence of speaking
and canvassing for the candidates whom he had named as consules suffecti
for the rest of that year (Tac. H. ii 71, 91).
perpetuum consulem: so he is described in an inscription at Rome
(C.I.L. vi 929, Dessau 242): A. Vitellius L. f. imperator cos. perp.; on a
fragmentary milestone in Sardinia there is an inscription (C.I.L. x 8016,
Dessau 243) which Dessau restores as : [a] Turre xliii | [im]p. A. Vitellius
c[os. perp]. A life consulship was decreed to Caligula, but he declined it
(Dio lix 6); the senate also decreed continui consulatus to Nero (Tac. 4.
xiii 41); Domitian was made consul for a period of ten years (Dio lxvii 4),
and Tiberius for five years (Dio lviii 4).
inferias Neroni dedit: Tac. H. ii 95, Laetum foedissimo cuique apud
bonos invidiae fuit, quod extructis in campo Martio aris inferias Neroni
fecisset. Caesae publice victimae cremataeque; facem Augustales subdidere, quod sacerdotium
Caesar Tiberius Iuliae genti sacravit: Dio
1xv 7, ὅτι μέντοι τὸν Νέρωνα μιμεῖσθαι ἤθελε καὶ ἐνήγισε (= inferias dedit) τε αὐτῷ, καὶ
ὅτι τοσαῦτα ἐς τὰ δεῖπνα ἀνήλισκεν, οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι καὶ κατὰ ταῦτ᾽ ἔχαιρον, οἱ δὲ δὴ νοῦν·
ἔχοντες ἤχθοντο: Eutrop. vii 18, 4, Hic cum Neroni similis esse vellet atque
id adeo prae se ferret, ut etiam exequias Neronis, quae humiliter sepultae
fuerant, honoraret. From the Campus Martius one could look up to the
"Hill of Gardens" (Collis Hortulorum, Monte Pincio) and see the tomb
of the Domitii where the ashes of Nero were placed; cf. Suet. Ner. 50,
Reliquias gentili Domitiorum monimento condiderunt, quod prospicitur
e campo Martio impositum colli Hortulorum. For the slavish devotion of
Vitellius to Nero see on c. 4 supr.
citharoedum: see on Dom. 4, 4. On citharoedi at Roman banquets see
Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 175; Marquardt, Privatl.2 151. For Nero's performances as a citharoedus cf. c. 4, n.
dominico: dominicus (sc. liber) or dominicum was apparently the name
of a book containing Nero's compositions (or favourite pieces) which may
have been published by himself. Hofstee proposed to read dominicis (sc.
canticis). The adj. dominicus (from dominus "lord and master'') is used
at times in reference to the emperors, e.g. Cod. Iust. vii 38, res ("property'") dominica, coloni dominici. For the title dominus applied to the
emperor see on Dom. 13, 1. The variant Domitio (XN) is read in the early
editions. Nero's original name was L. Domitius Ahenobarbus, but after
his adoption by Claudius he was called Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus
Germanicus, and the use of his earlier name in addressing him was regarded by him as an insult (Ner. 7 and 41: Tac. A. xii 41); Oudendorp
rightly says that an admirer like Vitellius would not so speak of him.
diceret:
caneret, a poetical use found also in post-class. prose.
Neroniana cantica: for cantica see on Galb. 13. References to Nero's
=
performances are found in Suet. Ner. 21, Niobam se cantaturum .. pronuntiavit Tragoedias quoque cantavit personatus (“wearing a mask")
heroum deorumque, item heroidum ac dearum, personis ("masks") effectis
ad similitudinem oris sui et feminae, prout quamque diligeret. Inter cetera
cantavit Canacen parturientem, Oresten matricidam, Oedipodem excaecatum,
Herculem insanum: Dio lxi 20, ἐκιθαρῴδησέ τε῎Αττιν τινὰ ἢ Βάκχας: id. lxii 18,
τὴν σκευὴν τὴν κιθαρῳδικὴν λαβὼν ἦσεν ἅλωσιν ᾿Ἰλίου (cf. Suet. Ner. 38, 2, halosin
Ilii in illo suo scaenico habitu decantavit; these were probably lines from
his own poem Τρωϊκά): Philostrat. vit. Apoll. iv 39: Tac. A. xv 33, xvi 4:
Juv. viii 228 sq.
exultans: to jump up (exultare) or rise to one's feet (assurgere) was
a regular method of showing approval; e.g. Aug. 53, 1, сит universi
exultantes comprobassent: Ner. 24, 1, inter exultationes succlamationesque
populi: Plin. Ep. vii 24, exultabant, plaudebant, mirabantur: ix 23, omnes
repente consurgerent laudarentque: vi 17, non labra diduxerunt, non
moverunt manum, non denique adsurrexerunt, saltem lassitudine sedendi.
CHAPTER 12.
histrionum et aurigarum: these two classes are mentioned by Tacitus
as among the crowd which flocked from the city to welcome Vitellius on
his approach: H. ii 87, adgregabantur e plebe flagitiosa per obsequia
Vitellio cogniti scurrae histriones aurigae, quibus ille amicitiarum dehonestamentis mire gaudebat: ib. 71, quantoque magis propinquabat,
tanto corruptius iter inmixtis histrionibus et spadonum gregibus et cetero
Neronianae aulae ingenio. For the interest of Vitellius in aurigae see
c. 7, 1 and c. 4.
Asiatici: within three months after the accession of Vitellius this
infamous freedman had acquired a power at Rome which rivalled the sway
exercised in Nero's reign by the freedmen such as Polyclitus and Patrobius:
Тас. Н. ii 95, Nondum quartus a victoria mensis, et libertus Vitellii
Asiaticus Polyclitos Patrobios et vetera odiorum nomina (“the hated
names of earlier times") aequabat. Nemo in illa aula probitate aut industria certavit; unum ad potentiam iter, prodigis epulis et sumptu gula
ganeaque satiare inexplebiles Vitellii libidines. Asiaticus paid a heavy
penalty for this "mala potentia"; after the death of Vitellius, when
Mucianus and the victorious Flavians entered the city, he was crucified as
a slave, though Vitellius had made him an eques: H. iv 11, Asiaticus
enim (is libertus) malam potentiam servili supplicio expiavit. In Sidon.
Apollin. Εp. v 7 he is mentioned in a list of Rome's most notorious freedmen: Hi sunt, quorum comparationi digitum tollerent (i.e. "would acknowledge themselves inferior'") Narcissus, Asiaticus, Massa, Marcellus, Carus,
Parthenius, Licinus, et Pallas. Plutarch (Galb. 20) inaccurately says that
he was a freedman of Galba.
Puteolis: Puteoli, mod. Pozzuoli, on the coast of Campania near Baiae
and Naples.
poscam: a mixture of vinegar and water (ὀξύκρατον), which was
drunk by the lower classes, by slaves (e.g. Plaut. Mil. 836, alii [servorum]
ebrii sunt, alii poscam potitant), and by soldiers (e.g. Spart. Hadr. 10,
cibis etiam castrensibus libenter utens, hoc est larido, caseo, et posca).
reprehendisset: this reading is established against the variant deprehendisset by Calig. 45, veluti profugos ac reprehensos in catenis reduxit;
cf. Phaedr. v 8, 3, elapsum semel non ipse possit Iuppiter reprendere:
Plaut. Most. 863, servi fugiunt, sed si reprensi sunt, etc.
statimque: -que is here used nearly as equivalent to autem or sed;
cf. Iul. 19, 1, is
quoniam inferior gratia esset, pecuniaque polleret.
This use is generally found after a negative, e.g. Cic. Tusc. i 29, 71,
Socrates nec patronum quaesivit nec iudicibus supplex fuit, adhibuitque
liberam contumaciam: Ov. Met. ii 811, quae neque dant flammas lenique
vapore cremantur; less often after an affirmative, e.g. Sall. Cat. 3, 3, studio
ad rempublicam latus sum ibique multa mihi advorsa fuere.
solvit: this reading is found in the ed. Basil., 1533; the MSS. give
coluit. Oudendorp proposed ex(s)olvit.
in deliciis habuit: = usus est ut delicato suo (see on Tit. 7, 2).
gravatus: this verb is always a deponent in Suetonius (as in Cic.)
and is used either with the acc. (Aug. 72, 3; Tib. 50, 2; Ner. 34, 1;
cf. Hor. C. iv 11, 27, Pegasus terrenum equitem gravatus) or with the
infin. (Aug. 34, 2; so Cic., Caes., Liv.); this is the only place where it is
used with ob.
circumforano: “journeying about to market-towns or fairs (fora)'';
cf. Cic. Cluent. 40, pharmacopola circumforan(e)us “an itinerant quack":
Apul. Met. ix 4, circumforaneum mendicabulum “a vagrant beggar." The
termination -anus (not -aneus) is strongly attested here; for the variations
in the MSS. of other authors see Thes. Ling. Lat.
lanistae: lanista (connected with lanius "butcher'") was the title of
the trainer in the school (ludus) where gladiators were kept; cf. Juv. xi 8,
scripturus leges et regia verba lanistae (see Mayor's note): Suet. Iul. 26, 3,
Tirones neque in ludo neque per lanistas sed in domibus per equites
Romanos erudiebat. The body of gladiators under a lanista was called
a familia; Augustus during a scarcity of food at Rome expelled the
lanistarum familiae (Aug. 42, 3). The lanistae not merely trained gladiators,
they also bought, sold, and let them out for hire. Itinerant lanistae engaged
in trafficking of this kind, and gave gladiatorial spectacles in country towns
or supplied gladiators; cf. Tac. A. iv 62, where there is a description
of a terrible disaster at Fidenae, in which 50,000 were killed or maimed,
owing to the collapse of a badly constructed amphitheatre where a speculative freedman was giving a display of gladiators.
muneris: sc. gladiatorii; cf. Tit. 8, 2.
provincia: Africa; see cс. 5.
primo imperii die: April 19, 69 A.D.; see on Oth. 11, 2 and Vesp. 6, 3,
principatus dies. Tacitus (H. ii 57) says that the honour was conferred
on Asiaticus when Vitellius, on his march from Germany, heard of his
victory at Bedriacum and the death of Otho.
aureis anulis: the sign of equestrian rank; see on Galb. 10, 3; 14, 2.
super cenam: for this use of super see on Tit. 8, 1.
rogantibus pro eo cunctis: Tac. H. ii 57, Postulante exercitu, ut
libertum suum Asiaticum equestri dignitate donaret, inhonestam adulationem
compescuit. Dein mobilitate ingenii, quod palam abnuerat, inter secreta
convivii largitur, honoravitque Asiaticum anulis, foedum mancipium
('slave'") et malis artibus ambitiosum.
CHAPTER 13.
vel praecipue: see on Dom. 19.
luxuriae...deditus: cf. Dio lxv 2, τῇ τε τρυφῇ καὶ τῇ ἀσελγείᾳ προσκείμενος :
ib. c. 3, καὶ ἐγένετο ὁ χρόνος ὁ τῆς ἀρχῆς αὐτοῦ σύμπας οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ μέθαι τε καὶ κῶμοι:
Eutrop. vii 18, Vitellius cum multo dedecore imperavit, et gravi saevitia
notabilis, praecipue ingluvie et voracitate, quippe cum de die quarto vel
quinto (i.e. 4 or 5 times a day) feratur epulatus: Oros. vii 8, 7, incredibili voracitatis appetitu: Sidon. Carm. iv 1.08, mihi (i.e. Rome) foeda
Vitelli | intulit ingluvies ventrem, qui tempore parvo|regnans sero perit:
Tac. H. ii 62, 95 (quoted on c. 10, 2 and c. 12): Lamprid. Heliogab. 24,
cenas et Vitellii et Apicii vicit (Heliogabalus).
saevitiae: Suetonius deals with this in the following chapter.
trifariam
quadrifariam: for the formation of these adverbs see
on plurifariam, c. 9. Dio (lxv 4) enumerates the feasts of Vitellius each
day: ἀκράτισμα (iantaculum), ἄριστον (prandium), δεῖπνον (cena), and
μεταδόρπια (comissationes).
iantacula: see on c. 7, 3. Though usually the iantaculum was a very
frugal meal, Vitellius made it a luxurious repast.
prandia: see on Dom. 21, prandebat ad satietatem.
cenas: after the prandium, or lunch, a siesta (meridiatio) was taken;
then came gymnastics or other exercises, followed by the bath, and dinner
(cena) was usually taken about the 9th hour (3.45 p.m. in summer, 2.15 in
winter). For a detailed account of the cena see Marquardt, Privatl.2
297 sqq.
comissationes: see on Dom. 21. To eat anything during a comissatio,
except as a relish to the wine, was most unusual.
facile omnibus sufficiens: though Vitellius was able to stand this
gluttony, his fellow-diners suffered badly from over-eating; cf. Dio lxv 2,
ἀφ' οὗπερ (sc. τὸ ἐξεμεῖν) καὶ ἀνταρκεῖν ἠδύνατο· ἐπεὶ οἵγε συνδειπνοῦντες αὐτῷ πάντες
κακῶς ἀπήλλασσον. Dio adds a good story about Vibius Crispus (Dom. 3, 1)
who was ill from the effects for some days and not able to attend the
banquets, and who wittily remarked "Had I not been ill, I would have
been killed entirely” (εἰ μὴ ἐνενοσήκειν, πάντως ἂν ἀπολώλειν).
vomitandi consuetudine: cf. Dio, l.c., τὸ πλεῖστον καὶ τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τῆς
νυκτὸς ἐδαπάνα, ἀπλήστως τε ἐμφορούμενος (‘"filling himself”) καὶ συνεχῶς πάντα
ἐξεμῶν, ὡς μόνῃ τῇ παρόδῳ τῶν σιτίων τρέφεσθαι. Vomiting, as a remedy for over-eating, was not confined to mere gluttons like Vitellius; it was commonly
resorted to by the wealthier classes at Rome, and the utility of it is recognised, and its use defined, by medical writers, e.g. Celsus (i 3). The
emperor Claudius was relieved in this way; Claud. 33, Nec temere umquam
triclinio abscessit nisi distentus ac madens, et ut statim supino ac per
somnum hianti pinna in os induceretur ad exonerandum stomachum.
Martial refers to the practice (iii 82, 9; vii 67, 10; etc.); Seneca (ad
Helv. 10, 3) denounces it: vomunt ut edant, edunt ut vomant, et epulas
quas toto orbe conquirunt, nec concoquere ("digest'") dignantur. See
Marquardt, op. cit. 330.
indicebat aliud alii: cf. Ner. 27, 3, indicebat familiaribus cenas (“he
invited himself to dinner at his friends' houses"). Dio (lxv 4) says
that the providing of feasts for Vitellius was a heavy burden on his
hosts, but that the wealthy vied in their eagerness to entertain him.
Elagabalus had each course of a banquet served at the house of a different
friend: Lamprid. Heliogab. 30, Celebravit item tale convivium, ut apud
amicos singulos singuli missus appararentur, et cum alter maneret in
Capitolio, alter in Palatio, alter super Aggerem, alter in Caelio, alter trans
Tiberim, et ut quisque mansisset, tamen per ordinem in eorum domibus
singula fercula ederentur, ireturque ad omnium domos: sic unum convivium vix acto die finitum est.
minus: Ursinus would read minoris, but cf. Ner. 30, 3, numquam minus
mille carrucis fecisse iter traditur. Such constructions are common in the
Latin of all periods (Kühner-Stegmann, ii 471).
apparatus: cf. c. 10, 2.
quadringenis milibus nummum: about £3,400. In Ner. 27, 3 Suetonius
tells us that one of Nero's friends, to whose house Nero had invited himself
for dinner, expended 4,000,000 sesterces on a cena mitellita, and another
expended considerably more on a cena rosaria. Dio says that Vitellius in
his brief reign spent 900 million sesterces on dinners, and that on one
dinner he expended 4 million sesterces; cf. Tac. H. ii 95, noviens milliens
sestertium paucissimis mensibus intervertisse ("squandered'') creditur:
iii 36. Gibbon (Decline and Fall of the Rom. Emp., c. 3) stigmatizes
"the beastly Vitellius, who consumed in mere eating at least six millions
of our money in about seven months, and whose vices it is not easy to
express with dignity or even decency.”
§ 2. famosissima: cf. Eutrop. vii 18, notissima certe cena memoriae
mandata est, quam ei Vitellius frater exhibuit, in qua super ceteros sumptus
duo milia piscium, septem avium adposita traduntur. Suetonius nearly
invariably uses famosus in a bad sense ("infamous" "notorious”), but
in Calig. 19, 2, we find curriculo biiugi famosorum (= celebrium) equorum.
super ceteras: for this pleonastic addition cf. Dom. 12, 2, praeter
ceteros acerbissime: Galb. 9, 1, multo praeter ceteras altiorem crucem.
cena adventicia: it was customary to give a dinner to a friend or
relative who had arrived safely from a journey (Gr. δεῖπνον ὑποδεκτικόν);
cf. Plaut. Bacch. 534, Salvos quom peregre advenis | cena detur: id. Stich.
512, Et magis par fuerat me vobis dare cenam advenientibus. The phrase
“adventicia (cena)" is used metaph. in Petron. Satyr. 91, quoties theatrum,
ut recitarem aliquid, intravi, hac me adventicia (sc. lapidibus) excipere
frequentia solet. Martial (xii praef.) uses “adventoria (cena)" of a book
of epigrams which he has provided to entertain a friend on his arrival.
The ante-penult. is long in adjectives in -icius formed from participles;
see Duff on Juv. iii 265.
fratre: Lucius Vitellius; see c. 3, 1; 5, 1.
lectissimorum piscium: cf. Plaut. Most. 730, Vino et victu, piscatu
probo electili | vitam colitis. The fish most highly esteemed at Rome were
the acipenser (sturgeon), aurata (gilt-bream), lupus (pike), scarus (wrasse ?),
mullus (mullet), murena (lamprey), and rhombus (turbot). See
Marquardt, op. cit. 432 sqq.
avium: these might include the lagopus (white grouse), scolopax (snipe),
attagen (hazel-hen), turdus (fieldfare), perdix (partridge), miliaria (ortolan),
ficedula (beccafico), coturnix (quail), pavo (peacock), Africa or Numidica
avis (guinea-fowl), phasianus or tetrao (pheasant), grus (crane), ciconia
(stork), phoenicopterus (flamingo).
patina: a deep earthenware dish (like the Gr. τρύβλιον) used for
cooking (especially fish, also ragoûts, etc., cf. Plaut. Asin. 180 where
patinarius "stewed" is opposed to assus "roast'"), and also for serving
food (cf. Plaut. Pseud. 840, Hor. Sat. ii 8, 43, Affertur squillas inter
murena natantes | in patina porrecta). Costly patinae for use at table
were sometimes made of silver. Aesopus, the tragic actor, had a patina
(of pottery) worth 100,000 sesterces (Plin. N.H. xxxv 163). Pliny (l.c.)
says that the patina of Vitellius cost 1,000,000 sesterces (£8,500) and that a
special oven had to be built for the making of it: At, Hercules, Vitellius
in principatu suo decies sestertium condidit patinam, cui faciendae fornax
in campis exaedificata erat, quoniam eo pervenit luxuriae ut etiam fictilia
pluris constent quam murrina (‘‘myrrhine vases''). Propter hanc Mucianus
(Vespasian's general, see Vesp. 6, 4) altero consulatu suo in conquestione
exprobravit patinarum paludes ("dishes as broad as the Pomptine marsh'')
Vitellii memoriae, non illa foediore, cuius veneno Asprenati reo Cassius
Severus (see Vitell. 2, 1) accusator obiciebat interisse convivas cxxx.
(lxv 3) differs in saying that the patina of Vitellius was made of silver,
being too large for pottery, and adds that it was afterwards melted down
by Hadrian: ἐπειδὴ ἀδύνατον ἦν κεραμεᾶν τηλικαύτην γενέσθαι, ἀργύρου τε ἐποιήθη,
καὶ ἔμεινε πολὺν χρόνον, ὥσπερ τι ἀνάθημα (res deis consecrata), μέχρις οὗ ῾Αδριανὸς
αὐτὴν ἰδὼν συνεχώνευσεν.
Dio
clipeum Minervae πολιούχου: the reference, most probably, is to the
colossal bronze statue of Athena Promachos by Pheidias on the Acropolis
at Athens. It was 50-60 ft. high, and represented the goddess holding up
her spear and shield in the attitude of battle; the shield is said to have
been engraved at a later period by Mys. Some think that the statue
referred to is the chryselephantine (gold and ivory) statue of Athena in
the Parthenon, the greatest of Pheidias' works at Athens. It was 40 ft.
high and represented the goddess with a spear in her left hand and an
image (4 cubits high) of Victory in her right. On the inner side of her
shield, which rested on the ground beside her, was embossed the battle
of gods and giants, and on the outer side the battle of the Amazons and
Athenians. πολιούχου was restored by Stephanus for τονδυχου of the MSS.
The title πολιοῦχος “protectress of the city" was often applied to Athena,
e.g. Aristoph. Eq. 581, Nub. 602, Αυ. 827; so Παλλάς πολιάοχος, Pind. 0. 5,
24, etc. Boissevain thinks that Vitellius was playing on the two words
πολιοῦχος and πολυοῦχος ("holding much'').
scarorum iocinera: it is uncertain what particular fish the scarus
was; it has been identified with the wrasse ("parrot-wrasse, Butler and
Owen on Apul. Apol. 39). Pliny (N.H. ix 62) describes it as the most
highly prized of fish, brought originally from the Carpathian sea (between
Rhodes and Crete) by Optatus, praefectus classis under Tiberius, and
planted in the sea between Ostia and Campania, where it was preserved
for the first five years. Ennius in his Hedyphagetica (cited in Apul. Apol.
39) calls it "cerebrum Iovis" (a proverbial expression with the Persians
for a rare delicacy): Quid scarŭ(m) praeterii cerebrum Iovi' paene supremi?
See also Athenaeus vii 113; Hor. Epod. 2, 50; id. Sat. ii 2, 22; Petron.
Satyr. 119; Mart. xiii 84.
phasianarum: the fem. form is used also in Plin. N.H. instead of the
more usual phasianus. According to tradition the pheasant was introduced
from the Phasis in Colchis by the Argonauts; cf. Mart. xiii 72, Argoa
primum sum transportata carina: | ante mihi notum nil nisi Phasis erat:
Petron. Satyr. 79, iam Phasidos unda | orbata est avibus. Seneca (ad
Helv. 10) denounces those who imported them to Rome: Dii istos deaeque
perdant, quorum luxuria tam invidiosi imperii fines transcendit.
Phasin capi volunt, quod ambitiosam popinam instruat.
Ultra
pavonum: the peacock was said to have been brought from Asia to
Samos and thence to Greece and Italy. The orator Hortensius, Cicero's
rival, first had it served at a banquet in Rome to celebrate his entry to
the college of augurs (Plin. N.H. x 45). It became a regular dish at all
sumptuous entertainments; cf. Varr. R.R. iii 6; Hor. Sat. ii 2, 23; Juv. i
143; etc.
among the contents of
ἐγκεφάλους (cerebella) καὶ
"redcerebella: mentioned also by Dio (lxv 3)
the mighty patina of Vitellius: γλώττας τε καὶ
ἥπατα (iocinera) καὶ ἰχθύων καὶ ὀρνίθων τινῶν ἐμβαλών. The dimin. cerebellum
was properly only used of the brains of animals other than man. The
brains of various birds were esteemed a dainty; cf. Lamprid. Heliogab. 20,
exhibuit magides (“dishes'') extis mullorum refertas et cerebellis
phoenicopterum ... et cerebellis turdorum: ib. 30, sescentorum struthionum
("ostriches") capita una cena multis mensis exhibuit ad edenda cerebella.
linguas phoenicopterum: the flamingo (Gr. φοινικόπτερος
winged'') was a native of the banks of the Nile (Heliod. Aethiop. vi 268);
the delicate flavour of its tongue was discovered by the notorious gourmet
Apicius (fl. 25 A.D.): Plin. N.H. x 133, Phoenicopteri linguam praecipui
saporis esse Apicius docuit nepotum omnium altissimus gurges; cf. Mart.
xiii 71: Sen. Ep. 110, non magnam rem facis, quod non desideras
linguas phoenicopterorum et alia portenta luxuriae iam tota animalia
fastidientis et certa membra ex singulis eligentis. In the temple which
Caligula erected to himself as a god flamingoes were among the victims
offered (Calig. 22).
Siculo
murenarum: lampreys were brought from the Straits of Messina
(fretum Siculum) to the fish ponds (piscinae) at Rome: Macrob. Sat. iii
15, 7, arcessebantur murenae ad piscinas nostrae urbis ab usque freto
illic enim optimae a prodigis esse creduntur; cf. Juv. v 99,
Virroni murena datur, quae maxima venit | gurgite de Siculo. A family
of the gens Licinia was given the name "Murena" from the fish:
Colum. viii 16, 5, Iam enim celebres erant deliciae popinales cum ad mare
deferrentur vivaria, quorum studiosissimi, velut ante devictarum gentium
Numantinus et Isauricus, ita Sergius Aurata (the fish "aurata" was the
gilt-bream) et Licinius Murena captorum piscium laetabantur vocabulis.
lactes: Gr. γαλακτίδες, the smaller entrails, "tender small guts"
(Holland). Priscian says that the sing. is haec lactis. Lampridius
(Heliogab. 23) mentions among the extravagant eccentricities of Elagabalus
““murenarum lactibus et luporum (“pikes'') in locis mediterraneis rusticos
pavit." The lactes of both men and beasts are often mentioned, especially
by the comic writers and satirists, e.g. Titin. (90, Ribb.): Pompon. (61,
•
Ribb.): Plaut. Curcul. 319, Pseud. 320: Persius 2, 30, Qua tu mercede
deorum | emeris auriculas? pulmone et lactibus unctis? ("a dishful of
lungs and greasy chitterlings," Conington).
a Parthia usque: the ransacking of sea and land to provide dainties
for Vitellius is described in Dio lxv 3: πάντα τε γὰρ τὰ τιμιώτατα καὶ ἀπ'
αὐτοῦ τοῦ ὠκεανοῦ, ἵνα μηδὲν εἴπω πλέον, καὶ ἐκ τῆς γῆς καὶ ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης
συνήγετο, καὶ πολυτελῶς οὕτως ἐσκευάζετο ὥστε Οὐιτελλιανὰ καὶ νῦν ἐξ ἐκείνου καὶ
πέμματα καὶ ἄλλα τινὰ βρώματα ὀνομάζεσθαι. Parthia and the fretum
Hispanicum are used here for the extreme E. and W., usually denoted by
India and Spain (e.g. Sen. N.Q. i pr. 13, ab ultimis litoribus Hispaniae
usque ad Indos). The genuineness of the reading Parthia has been
suspected, and various conjectures have been made, such as Carpathio (R
has pathia), Carteia, Carpetano.
freto Hispanico: the Straits of Gibraltar, also called fretum Gaditanum,
fretum Herculeum, fretum Tartessium, fretum Iberum, etc.
per navarchos ac triremes: in the Roman fleet the title navarchus
(ναύαρχος) seems to have been applied strictly to the captain of a larger
ship (quadrireme, quinquireme, etc.), trierarchus denoting the captain of
a smaller; but at times we find navarchus used for a commander of a
squadron. Cf. Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 513; Mommsen on C.I.L. x 3340;
Furneaux-Pelham on Tac. A. xv 51. For an example of the use of the
Roman fleet to import luxuries see on
“scarorum” above.
§ 3. non.. modo sed quoque: when quoque is thus used in the
second clause in place of the regular etiam, it marks a mere addition and
not an intensification or climax. See Kühner-Stegmann, ii 59, where
numerous instances from Cic. and Liv. are given.
profundae gulae: see on c. 7, 1.
viscus: the sing. is only found in poetry and post-Aug. prose. Both
viscus and viscera are used at times for “flesh"; cf. Serv. on Aen. vi 253
(et solida imponunt taurorum viscera flammis): Non exta dicit, sed carnes;
nam viscera sunt quidquid inter ossa et cutem est; unde etiam visceratio
dicitur convivium de carnibus factum. See Munro on Lucr. i 837.
farris frusta: "bits of the sacrificial cakes (liba)." Servius, commenting on adorea liba in Aen. vii 109, says: Ador proprie est genus
farris, Liba autem sunt placentae de farre, melle, et oleo, sacris aptae.
These cakes were either simply placed on the altar during the religious
ceremony or burnt in the fire. The reading is very uncertain; the principal
MSS. have merely farris, the others farra and farris frusta (-tra).
Preud 'homme reads farris frusta; Ihm, keeping farris, marks paene as
corrupt. Various corrections have been proposed: farris grana (Oudendorp);
farcimina (Bentley); farris panes (G. Becker, regarding the following
paene as a corruption of panes); liba farris (Roth). Of these conjectures
Becker's is the most attractive, though panem (cf. Catull. 59, quoted below)
seems preferable to panes and more likely to be corrupted into paепе.
paene rapta e foco: cf. Ter. Eunuch, 491, e flamma petere cibum (of
stealing food placed on the funeral pyre as an offering to the di inferi):
Catull. 59, uxor Meneni, saepe quam in sepulcretis | vidistis ipso rapere de
rogo cenam, | cum devolutum ex igne prosequens panem | ab semiraso tunderetur ustore. The Gr. βωμολόχος was derived from βωμός "altar" and
2 A
λοχάω “to lie in wait," and originally meant one who hung about the
altars to steal some of the meat offered. The emperor Claudius, who
rivalled Vitellius in gluttony (‘‘cibi vinique quocumque et tempore et loco
appetentissimus,” Claud. 33), on one occasion was sitting in court when
his nostrils caught the savour of a meal being made ready for the Salii in
the temple of Mars close by; he left the tribunal and went and joined the
priests at table.
fumantia: cf. Mart. i 41, 9, quod fumantia qui tomacla raucus | circumfert tepidis cocus popinis: Sid. Ep. viii 11.
pridiana atque semesa: cf. Tib. 34, 1, Et ut parsimoniam publicam
exemplo quoque iuvaret, sollemnibus ipse cenis pridiana saepe ac semesa
obsonia apposuit; Calig. 58, 1, marcente adhuc stomacho pridiani cibi onere.
The adj. pridianus (= ἕωλος, hesternus) is post-Aug.; cf. Apul. Apol. 6:
id. Met. vii 20, xi 7. For other compounds with semi- used by Suetonius
see on seminudus c. 17, 1.
cuiuscumque:
=
CHAPTER 14.
cuiusvis, cuiuslibet; see on Galb. 4, 3.
necem atque supplicium: Bremi rightly regards this as one of the
places where Suetonius couples two expressions which denote practically
the same thing; cf. Iul. 49, 2, ad cyathum et vinum stetisse: ib. 68, 1,
gratuitam et sine frumento stipendioque operam: Aug. 17, 4, venenum et
virus: Ner. 15, 2, dilationis ac morae: Galb. 9, 1, desidiam segnitiamque:
Calig. 11, animadversionibus poenisque. Suetonius (like Tacitus, see
Gerber and Greef Lex. Tac.) very often uses supplicium in the sense of
supplicium capitale or capitis, e.g. a few lines later we find quendam
supplicio traditum; cf. c. 10, 1. supplicium can, of course, be used of
other punishments especially torture; cf. Cic. Imp. Pomp. 5, 11, aliquem
vinculis ac verberibus atque omni supplicio excruciatum necare. A passage
which resembles ours is Tib. 62, 1, neque tormentis neque supplicio cuiusquam pepercit, but there supplicium denotes the execution which followed
the torture.
..
societatem imperii: cf. Tib. 25, 3, celerem successionem vel certe
societatem principatus opperiri; Oth. 8, 1, and Tit. 9, 3, consors imperii.
adlicefactos: this post-class. compound is found also in Sen. Ep. 118, 8,
quod invitat ad se et adlicefacit. It is a quite unnecessary addition to the
class. adlicere (Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 135).
in aquae frigidae potione: in the same way as the poison of Locusta
was administered to Britannicus: Tac. A. xiii 16, frigida in aqua adfunditur venenum, quod ita cunctos eius artus pervasit, ut vox pariter et
spiritus raperentur; cf. Justin xii 14, 9 (the poisoning of Alexander the
Great), Philippus et Iollas praegustare ac temperare potum regis soliti,
in aqua frigida venenum habuerunt, quam praegustatae iam potioni
supermiserunt.
§2. faeneratorum: Vitellius must often have had to resort to these
usurers to try to meet his multitude of creditors (see c. 7, 2). For
Vespasian's restriction on faeneratores see Vesp. 11.
stipulatorum: these stipulatores were those who had given loans to
Vitellius by the process of stipulatio or legally enforceable verbal contract
(often registered for reference in writing), which took the form of the
question and answer Spondesne? Spondeo. The questioner was called
stipulator or reus stipulandi ("person concerned with stipulating'"), the
answerer usually promissor or reus promittendi. In cases of default the
money was recoverable by the summary procedure of a condictio certae
creditae pecuniae (the condictio being 30 days' notice). The repayment of
the capital, and the payment of interest required two distinct stipulationes
(Roby, Rom. Private Law ii 11 sqq., 71 sqq.).
publicanorum: like other vectigalia, the portoria here mentioned were
levied by the publicani, a title which strictly denoted those who farmed
the taxes from the State (qui publica vectigalia conducta habent), but was
also used (like portitores) of the actual tax-collectors, slaves or freedmen
(qui operas dabant publicanis).
portorium: a "toll" or transit charge levied on merchandise carried
through a country or over a bridge, also on vehicles and on persons; cf.
Sen. Const. Sap. 14, Quid ergo? Sapiens non accedet ad fores, quas durus
ianitor obsidet? Ille vero, si res necessaria vocabit, experietur, et illum,
quisquis erit, tanquam canem acrem, obiecto cibo leniet, nec indignabitur
aliquid impendere, ut limen transeat, cogitans et in pontibus quibusdam
pro transitu dari: Labeo Dig. xix 2, 60, cum (vehiculum) pontem transiret,
redemptor eius pontis portorium ab eo exigebat, etc.: Ulp. Dig. xxiv 1, 21,
si quis pro uxore sua vectigal, quod in itinere praestari solet, solvisset.
Suetonius also uses portoria in its other sense of duties paid on foreign
imports into a country: Iul. 43, 1, (Caesar) peregrinarum mercium portoria
instituit. See further on Vesp. 1, 2, publicum quadragesimae in Asia
egit.
flagitassent: Caes. B.G. i 16 and Cic. dom. 14 are the only exx. in
class. prose of flagitare with two accusatives, except where the acc. of the
thing is a neut. pron. (Kühner-Stegmann, i 300). See on “orabat,” Vesp.
16, 3.
quendam: it is generally assumed that this was Junius Blaesus, the
governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, who had been so lavishly generous to
Vitellius on his march to Rome (see on c. 10, 2). The poisoning of Blaesus
by Vitellius is described in Tac. H. iii 39, Trepidanti (Vitellio) inter scelus
metumque, ne dilata Blaesi mors maturam perniciem, palam iussa atrocem
invidiam ferret placuit veneno grassari. Addidit facinori fidem nobili (=
notabili) gaudio, Blaesum videndo. Quin et audita est saevissima Vitellii
vox, qua se (ipsa enim verba referam) pavisse oculos spectata inimici morte
iactavit. The only point, however, in common between the stories of
Tacitus and Suetonius is the remark of Vitellius, and more probably the
stories relate to two different acts of tyranny.
coram: see on Dom. 23, 1.
pascere oculos: cf. Cic. Verr. v 65, cum eius cruciatu atque supplicio
pascere oculos animumque exsaturare vellent: id. Phil. xi 3, 8, in eius
corpore lacerando atque vexando, cum animum satiare non posset, oculos
paverit suos.
Contrast "parcere oculis," Dom. 11, 3.
2A2
§3. heres meus es: for the custom of naming the emperor as heir
see on Dom. 9, 2.
Venetae factioni: see on c. 7, 1.
interemit: Domitian behaved in an equally tyrannical manner in the
amphitheatre (Dom. 10, 1).
=
nova spe: spe novarum rerum (mutationis imperii). The plur. novae
spes is used in the same way in Tac. A. xiv 58, xvi 23; cf. A. v 4, audiri
iam et legi novas ("revolutionary'') contiones, nova patrum consulta.
opinatus: this is the reading of X; obstinatus (M); obstinatosque (G).
•
§ 4. vernaculis: "scurrilous jesters"; cf. Mart. x 3, 1, vernaculorum
dicta, where they are coupled with circulatores “glib cheap-jacks," as
also in Sen. Ben. vi 11. The vernae, or home-born slaves, were allowed
unusual licence by their masters and encouraged in pert insolence; cf.
Hor. Sat. ii 6, 66: Sen. Prov. 1, 6, cogita nos delectari vernularum
licentia,
horum ali audaciam: Tac. H. ii 88, vernacula utebantur
urbanitate. The vernaculi perhaps inspired the parody of Vitellius' proclamation which is mentioned here. A similar mock proclamation ridiculing
an enactment of Julius Caesar is quoted below (see note on "bonum
factum"), and in Iul. 20, 2, Suetonius describes how, when Julius Caesar
utterly ignored Bibulus his colleague in the consulship, the wits (urbani)
would sign and seal documents as "Done in the consulship of Julius and
Caesar'' (Iulio et Caesare consulibus actum), and also circulated the verses:
Non Bibulo quiddam nuper sed Caesare factum est; | nam Bibulo fieri
consule nil memini. The reading in our passage has been much disputed.
If a change were necessary, the simplest proposal is that of Sabellicus to
omit et and read vernaculis mathematicis "saucy astrologers." Scaliger
suggested veraculis or vericulis; Turnebus divinaculis; Madvig genethliacis,
i.e. those who calculated nativities. The text, however, is probably sound.
Suetonius was thinking of the contrast between Vitellius and Nero, who
bore with remarkable patience the gibes or lampoons (dicta aut carmina)
which were posted or circulated (proscripta aut vulgata) about him; see
Ner. 39, where Suetonius gives specimens of these and adds: sed neque
auctores requisiit et quosdam per indicem delatos ad senatum adfici graviore
poena prohibuit.
mathematicis: astrologi were called mathematici from the elaborate
mathematical calculations which they employed in casting a horoscope
(“genitura,” Tit. 9, 2). Tacitus (H. i 22) describes the mathematici as
“genus hominum potentibus infidum, sperantibus fallax, quod in civitate
nostra et vetabitur semper et retinebitur." As early as 139 B.C. astrologers
were expelled from Rome and Italy by a praetor's edict (Val. Max. i 3, 3).
In 33 B.c. Agrippa drove them from the city (Dio xlix 43). They were
banished from Italy, either by senatorial decree or imperial edict, under
Tiberius in 16 A.D. (Suet. Tib. 36, Tac. A. ii 32); under Claudius in 52 A.D.
(Tac. A. xii 52); and now again under Vitellius in 69 A.D. Within a few
months they were back, and Vespasian expelled them in 70 A.D., though he
himself made use of the masters of the craft, and even allowed the people
of Ephesus to celebrate a festival in honour of an astrologer (Dio lxvi 9).
deferretur: cf. Dom. 12, 2, ad fiscum deferebantur: ib. 15, 3, hunc
delatum. Post-Aug. writers use “deferre aliquem'' (= accusare); Cicero
has "deferre nomen alicuius,” e.g. Rosc. Am. 10, 28, ut nomen huius de
parricidio deferrent. Suetonius also uses "deferre nomen,” Iul. 30, 3,
delaturum se nomen eius. See note on "delatores,” Tit. 8. 5.
inauditum: see on Galb. 14, 3.
•
exacerbatus quod propositus est: where quod is used by Suetonius
with expressions of praising, blaming, accusing, grieving, etc., it is always
followed by the subjunctive except here and in Tit. 10, 1, Ner. 6, 2.
edictum: Tacitus mentions this expulsion of the astrologers (H. ii 62,
pulsi Italia mathematici), but it is not clear from his account whether the
edict ordering it was sent on in advance to Rome from Gaul by Vitellius,
like the edict concerning his titles (c. 8, 2). Dio, lxv 1, says that Vitellius
was already in the city when he published it: ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐν τῇ ῾Ρώμῃ ἐγένετο ..
πρόγραμμα ἔθετο (edictum proposuit), δι' οὗ τοὺς ἀστρολόγους ἐξήλασε, προειπών
σφισιν ἐντὸς τῆσδε τῆς ἡμέρας (ῥητήν τινα τάξας) ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς Ἰταλίας χωρῆσαι.
..
iubebat excederent: for this constr. see on "iussit ponerent,"
Vesp. 23, 3.
Chaldaeos: another name for the mathematici or astrologers; cf. Gell. i
9, 6, vulgus autem, quos gentilicio vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere oportet, mathematicos dicit: Cic. Div. i 1, Principio Assyrii, propter planitiem magnitudinemque regionum quas incolebant, cum caelum ex omni parte patens
atque apertum intuerentur, traiectiones motusque stellarum observaverunt;
quibus notatis, quid cuique significaretur, memoriae prodiderunt. Qua in
ratione Chaldaei, non ex artis, sed ex gentis, vocabulo nominati, diuturna
observatione siderum, scientiam putantur effecisse, ut praedici posset, quid
cuique eventurum, et quo quisque fato natus esset. Berosus, a Babylonian
priest (c. 340-270 в.с.), was the first Chaldaean who practised astrology in
Greece (Vitruv. ix 7), whence it spread to Italy. The calculations of the
Chaldaean astrologers are referred to as “Babylonii numeri’” in Hor. C. i
11, 3. See also Mayor on Juv. x 94, xiv 248, Marquardt, Staatsv. iii²
91 sqq.
dicere: edicere, the reading of Ursinus, may be correct.
..
bonum factum: a formula prefixed “ominis causa" (cf. the Gr. τύχῃ
ἀγαθῇ) to the praetor's edict; commonly represented by the abbreviation
B.F., e.g. Edict. praet. de camp. Esquil. (C.I.L. vi 31614), B.F., nei quis
intra terminos ustrinam fecisse velit. Cf. Suet. Iul. 80 (describing a
placard posted up in derision of Caesar's admission of Gauls to the senate):
Peregrinis in senatum adlectis libellus propositus est: “Bonum factum:
ne quis senatori novo curiam (the senate-house) monstrare velit'': Tertull.
Pudic. 1, O edictum turpe, cui adscribi non poterit “Bonum factum":
Plaut. Poen. 16, bonum factum esse, edicta ut servetis mea: Aur. Vict.
Vir. ill. 49, 16. Similar formulae "bene precandi et auspicandi aliquid”
are "Quod felix, seu bonum, faustumque sit reipublicae,” and “Quod
bene vertat (vortat).”
Germanicus: for this title of Vitellius see c. 8, 2.
intra eundem Kalendarum diem: in the version of the story in
Dio lxv 1 the Kalends of Oct. are not mentioned, but we are told that
the astrologers in reply published a proclamation that Vitellius should
depart this life before the end of the very day on which he actually died
(Dec. 18): καὶ αὐτῷ ἐκεῖνοι νυκτὸς ἀντιπροθέντες γράμματα, ἀντιπαρήγγειλαν
ἀπαλλαγῆναι ἐκ τοῦ βίου ἐντὸς τῆς ἡμέρας, ἐν ᾗ ἐτελεύτησε. καὶ οἱ μὲν οὕτως
ἀκριβῶς τὸ γενησόμενον προέγνωσαν. This version reflects much greater
credit on the prophetic powers of the astrologers.
ne usquam esset: usquam here means "anywhere in the land of
the living"; “nusquam esse" was used (especially in poetry) for "to be
no more," e.g. Hor. S. ii 5, 102, Ergo nunc Dama sodalis | nusquam est? :
Prop. iii 13, 58, Nusquam est delapsis Amphiaraus equis.
§ 5. suspectus in: for this constr. cf. Suet. Gramm. 16, suspectus in
filia patroni (sc. stupri): Tac. H. i 13, suspectus in Popраса.
quasi prohibuisset: Tacitus uses tamquam with suspectus, e.g. H.
iii 35, suspecta Germania, tamquam in auxiliumi Vitellii accingeretur. See
also on Tit. 5, 3, suspicio, quasi temptasset.
4
matris: Sextilia (c. 3, 1). Tacitus does not mention any such scandal,
when he describes her death: H. iii 67, Erat illi (Vitellio) et fessa aetate
parens; quae tamen paucis ante diebus opportuna morte excidium domus
praevenit, nihil principatu filii adsecuta nisi luctum et bonam famam.
vaticinante Chatta muliere: for the Chatti, a German tribe, see on
Dom. 6, 1. The MSS. here have the usual variations in the spelling of the
name: Chattha (M has this with an erasure point under the first h),
Catha, Cata (cf. Pauly-Wissowa s.v.).
Preud 'homme reads Cattha. In
Prosop. Imp. Rom. (i 323) Klebs treats Cattha as the name of the prophetess, which is probably an oversight. The veneration paid to prophetesses
by the Germans is described in Tac. Germ. 8: Inesse (sc. feminis) quin
etiam sanctum aliquid et providum putant, nec aut consilia earum aspernantur aut responsa neglegunt. Vidimus sub divo Vespasiano Velaedam
diu apud plerosque numinis loco habitam; sed et olim \Albrunam et complures alias venerati sunt, non adulatione nec tamquam facerent deas.
Velaeda (of the tribe of the Bructeri) by her prophecies had fomented the
revolt of Civilis (Tac. H. iv 61, etc.); she was brought as a prisoner to
Rome, probably under Vespasian, and she was succeeded by another prophetess, Ganna, in the reign of Domitian (Dio lxvii 5). Strabo (vii 2, 293)
gives an account of the προμάντεις ἱέρειαι of the Cimbri in Northern
Germany.
adquiescebat: see on Tit. 7, 2.
ita demum: = tum demum (Germ. so nur = dann nur, so erst = dann
erst), used by post-Aug. writers, especially in a conditional proposition;
cf. Claud. 25, 3, Seleuco regi amicitiam et societatem ita demum pollicens,
immunes praestitisset: Plin. Ep. iii 9, 11, tam numerosum agmen
reorum ita demum videbamus posse superari, si per singulos carperetur
(Hand Tursell. ii 255). See also on "demum,” Oth. 6, 3.
si
CHAPTER 15.
Vitellius had been first
octavo imperii mense: i.e. August, 69 A.D.
saluted as emperor on Jan. 3; see c. 8, 1. The legions in Egypt took the
oath of fealty to Vespasian on July 1; those in Judaea, either on July 3
(Тас. Н. ii 79) or July 11 (Suet. Vesp. 6, 3); those in Syria, before
July 15 (Tac. ii 81); the armies in Moesia, Dalmatia, and Pannonia then
joined his side, perhaps in August, as Suetonius says here (Tacitus, ii 85
sq., does not fix the exact time). The narrative of Suetonius is at least
misleading, for his words give the impression that the armies in Moesia
and Pannonia were the first to revolt from Vitellius, and that the armies
in Judaea and Syria also revolted in the eighth month; whereas they
revolted, according to his own showing (Vesp. 6, 3), in the seventh (July).
Hofstee suggests that septimo should be read here for octavo (i.e.
VIIIMP ..for VIIIIMP ..). In Vesp. 6, 2 Suetonius describes how the
detachment of the Moesian army which arrived too late to aid Otho at
Betriacum, when they heard of his death, advanced as far as Aquileia and
after a turbulent outburst tried to elect Vespasian as emperor. The movement was checked for the time, and the troops returned to their allegiance
to Vitellius; but when their action became known, the prefect of Egypt
was the first to compel his legions to take the oath to Vespasian on July 1.
exercitus Moesiarum atque Pannoniae: for the legions constituting
the armies in Moesia (later Servia and Bulgaria) and Pannonia (extending along the Danube from Vienna to Belgrade) see on Vesp. 6, 2 and
Oth. 9, 3. The plur. "Moesiae" refers to the two provinces called Moesia
Superior (Western half) and Inferior (Eastern half) separated by the
Ciabrus, a trib. of the Danube. Marquardt (Staatsv. i² 303) shows that the
division took place under Domitian; and so Suetonius is guilty of an
anachronism. The defection of the Moesian and Pannonian armies from
Vitellius is described in Tac. H. ii 85 sq., Dio lxv 9.
exercitus Iudaicus et Syriaticus: see on Vesp. 6. The form
"Syriaticus" is attested by the MSS. here; Sabellicus, Beroaldus, and
many subsequent editors altered it to “Syriacus.” The adj. “Syriaticus”
(cf. Asiaticus, Hadriaticus, Cibyraticus, etc.) occurs also in Florus ii 9, 1;
11, 1; 12, 1. Elsewhere Suetonius uses ‘“Syriacus” (Vesp. 6, 4; Tib.
48, 2; Calig. 10, 1).
in verba iurarunt: for this expression see on Galb. 11, 1.
dilectum in urbe egit: Tac. H. iii 58, vocari tribus iussit, dantes
nomina sacramento adigit; superfluente multitudine curam dilectus in
consules partitur; servorum numerum et pondus argenti senatoribus indicit.
ea condicione, ut: see on c. 6.
missionem: under the normal conditions of service the honesta missio
could only be gained after a number of years. In the time of Augustus
the legionary had to serve 16 years (later, 20 years), the praetorians 16,
the urban cohorts 20, and the auxiliaries 25 (Marquardt, op. cit. ii² 542).
veteranorum commoda: the "bounties" granted to those who
obtained the honesta missio took the form either of land or of money, the
praetorians getting 5000 denarii (= 20,000 sesterces) and the legionaries
3000 denarii under Augustus (Dio lv 23); this latter sum was reduced to
1500 by Caligula (Suet. Calig. 44) and raised to 5000 by Caracalla (Dio
lxxvii 24). Cf. Galb. 12, 2.
iustae militiae: regular service in the army for a definite number of
years (legitima stipendia facere); cf. iusti milites (“regular soldiers''),
Galb. 12, 2.
..
§ 2. urgenti terra hosti: Mucianus (see Vesp. 6, 4) was advancing
from the East to Italy with the 6th legion and 13,000 vexillarii (Tас. Н.
ii 83). Before they arrived, Antonius Primus (see c. 18 infr.) with the
forces from Moesia and Pannonia had occupied the eastern districts of
Italy, won the battle of Betriacum against the Vitellians, and stormed
Cremona.
mari: Mucianus had ordered the Pontic fleet to muster at Byzantium,
contemplating the possibility of blockading the E. coast of Italy (Tac.
l.c.); the fleet at Ravenna (in N.E. Italy, on the Adriatic) under Bassus
went over to Vespasian's side (Tac. ii 100), and later the fleet at Misenum
(in Campania) revolted from Vitellius (Tac. iii 56, 57, 60).
fratrem: i.e. Lucius Vitellius, who was consul in the same year as his
brother Aulus, the future emperor (see c. 3, 1), and succeeded him as proconsul of Africa (c. 5). He was put in command of Rome when his brother
took the field against Vespasian's generals (Tac. iii 55). Following the
revolt of the fleet at Misenum, there was an outbreak in Campania, and
Lucius was sent with six cohorts and 500 cavalry to crush it. Suetonius
is incorrect in saying that the emperor gave to his brother the fleet and a
band of gladiators. We see from Tacitus (iii 57) that it was Claudius
Julianus whom the emperor sent to win back the allegiance of the fleet,
and that he sent with him a city cohort and a troop of gladiators. Julianus,
however, proved a traitor and joining forces with the mutineers he occupied
Tarracina in Campania. Lucius Vitellius effected through treachery the
capture of this city which was remissly guarded by seamen and gladiators
(Tac. iii 76, Dio lxv 16). Tacitus says that if Lucius had returned at
once with his victorious army to Rome, a conflict of great magnitude and
involving the destruction of the city must have ensued, for Tarracina was
captured at about the same time as the burning of the Capitol in the last
struggle between the Vitellian and Flavian forces (see below).
Betriacenses copias et duces: the same generals, Aulus Caecina and
Fabius Valens (see c. 9, 1), who had defeated Otho's army at Betriacum
(Oth. 9, 2), were again appointed to command for Vitellius. Caecina was
sent on in advance; Valens was delayed by illness and took no part in
the decisive second battle of Betriacum (Tac. ii 99; Joseph. Bell. Iud. iv
11, 2; Dio lxv 10). The force with Caecina was made up of the 5th and
22nd legions, with detachments of the 1st (Germanica), 14th, 15th, and 16th;
the rear was brought up by the 21st (Rapax) and the 1st (Italica) with
detachments of three British legions (2nd, 9th, 20th) and a chosen body of
auxiliaries. A body of cavalry was sent on in front to occupy Cremona
(Tac. ii 100).
superatus: decisively at the second battle of Betriacum in Oct. 69 when
his army was vanquished by that of Vespasian under Antonius Primus.
See the description of the fighting in Tac. iii 21 sqq. The victors then
burned the city of Cremona, a stronghold of the Vitellians.
proditus: the two most notorious traitors to the cause of Vitellius before
the battle of Betriacum were Lucilius Bassus, prefect of the fleet at
Ravenna (Tac. iii 12, ii 100), and Aulus Caecina, commander-in-chief of the
army of Vitellius, who tried to induce his soldiers to throw in their lot
with the mutinous fleet and to desert to Vespasian. Some of the officers
supported him, but the troops were wildly indignant; they put him in
fetters and chose as their leaders Fabius Fabullus, legatus of the 5th legion,
and Cassius Longus, prefect of the camp (Tac. iii 13, ii 99). The
treachery of Caecina was fatal to Vitellius, as Antonius Primus attacked
when the Vitellian forces were thus disordered and without a competent
leader. Among those who proved false to Vitellius after the battle were
Claudius Apollinaris, prefect of the fleet at Misenum, and Claudius Julianus
who was sent by Vitellius to Misenum to check the mutiny (Tac. iii 57);
also Alfenus Varus and Julius Priscus, prefects of the praetorians (Tac.
iii 61).
salutem sibi pepigit: according to Tacitus (iii 63), after the
Vitellian army had surrendered at Narnia in Umbria, the generals of
Vespasian (Antonius Primus and Arrius Varus) sent messengers to
Vitellius at Rome offering him a safe retirement for himself and his
children in Campania, together with a sum of money; Mucianus also sent
letters to the same effect: Non omisere per eos dies Primus ac Varus
crebris nuntiis salutem et pecuniam et secreta Campaniae offerre Vitellio,
si positis armis seque ac liberos suos Vespasiano permisisset. In eundem
modum et Mucianus composuit epistulas; quibus plerumque fidere Vitellius,
ac de numero servorum, electione litorum loqui. Tanta torpedo invaserat
animum ut, si principem eum fuisse ceteri non meminissent, ipse oblivisceretur: iii 66, nunc pecuniam et familiam (= servos) et beatos
Campaniae sinus promitti.
milies sestertium: sc. centena milia, i.e. 100,000,000 sesterces, about
£850,000. Cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, 5, Vitellius ab Sabino urbi praefecto,
Vespasiani fratre, sestertium milies pepigerat arbitris militibus imperio
decedere. Tacitus nowhere specifies the amount.
Flavio Sabino: elder brother of Vespasian; for his career see on Vesp.
1, 3. He was praefectus urbi at this period, and after the surrender of the
Vitellian army the leading men at Rome invited him to seize the city.
Sabinus showed no eagerness to do so and held parleys with Vitellius
which are described in Tac. iii 65: Saepe domi congressi, postremo in aede
Apollinis, ut fama erat, pepigere.
Verba vocesque duos testes habebant,
Cluvium Rufum (the historian) et Silium Italicum (the poet).
procul visentibus notabantur, Vitellii proiectus et degener, Sabinus non
insultans et miseranti propior. When Sabinus was driven to take refuge
in the Capitol (see below), he sent a remonstrance to Vitellius for breaking
his agreement (Tac. c. 70).
Voltus
pro gradibus Palati: "standing forth on the steps of the Palace";
cf. Ner. 8, pro Palati gradibus imperator consalutatus: Tac. H. i 29, Piso
pro gradibus domus vocatos in hunc modum adlocutus est: iii 74, stantem
pro gradibus Palati Vitellium. For this meaning of pro cf. pro muris
(= stans in muris), Tac. A. ii 81; pro vallo (“from the rampart'"), id.
Agr. 35, H. i 36; pro ripa, A. xii 29; pro litore, A. xiv 30. See also on
pro tribunali, Vesp. 7, 2.
cedere se: Tac. H. iii 68, Vitellius, inter suos milites, prospectantibus
etiam feminis, pauca et praesenti maestitiae congruentia locutus, cedere se
pacis et rei publicae causa, etc.
cunctis reclamantibus: Tac. (l.c.), reclamantibus qui in contione adstiterant.
primo diluculo: the same phrase occurs in Cic. S. Rosc. 19, Apul. Met.
iii 25; also primulo diluculo (Plaut. Amph. 737), and diluculo (Afran. 70,
Cic. Att. xvi 13): “Diluculum” is defined in Censor. De die nat. 24, 2 as
"cum sole nondum orto iam lucet."
sordidatus: "in mourning"; see on "sordes” c. 8, 1. Tacitus (iii
67 sq.) describes how on Dec. 18 Vitellius clad in mourning robes (pullo
amictu) and surrounded by his sorrowing household went down from the
Palace to the Forum. His little son was carried on a litter as though in
a funeral procession. From the Rostra he told the people in a few words
that he was abdicating for the sake of peace and the State, and commended to their compassion his wife, children, and brother. Then, when
tears choked his utterance, he turned to the consul and tried to surrender
to him the dagger which he wore as Imperator. For the different sequence
of events in the narrative of Suetonius see below.
e libello: there is nothing in Tac. about Vitellius reading his speech
from a written document.
§3. interpellante milite ac populo: when Vitellius was going down
from the Palace to the Forum the people uttered greetings flattering but
inappropriate, while the soldiers preserved an ominous silence (Tac. iii 67,
voces populi blandae et intempestivae, miles minaci silentio). After his
speech, when Vitellius declared that he would go to the temple of Concord
and deposit his dagger there, and then go to his brother's house, there was
a fierce outcry: maior hinc clamor obsistentium penatibus privatis, in
Palatium vocantium. Interclusum aliud iter, idque solum, quo in Sacram
viam (the way back to the Palace) pergeret, patebat. Tum consilii inops
in Palatium rediit.
animum resumpsit: So Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, quasi renovato furore; it is
clear, however, from the account in Tac. that there was no display of
spirit by Vitellius at this juncture; he was “inops consilii,” and the events
which occurred next were due to the determination of his followers. His
vacillation is compared by Dio (lxv 16) to the tossing of a boat in a
storm: τῶν δὲ δὴ τοῦ Οὐεσπεσιανοῦ στρατηγῶν ἐπιόντων τῇ Ῥώμῃ, ἐξεπλάγη τε καὶ
ἐξέστη. ἓν μὲν γὰρ᾽ οὐδὲν οὔτε ἔπραττεν οὔτε ἐφρόνει, ἐμπλήκτως δὲ ἄνω καὶ κάτω
ἐφέρετο ὥσπερ ἐν κλύδωνι.
vi subita: an attack was made on the retinue of Sabinus, near the
Basin of Fundanius on the Quirinal, and the Vitellians had the better of
the encounter; Sabinus then sought safety by occupying the Capitol (Tac.
iii 69).
reliquos Flavianos: the Flaviani were the supporters of Vespasian
(Flavius Vespasianus); cf. partes Flavianae, Tac. ii 67, iii 1.
Mingled
with the soldiers who occupied the citadel were the consuls Quintius Atticus
and Caecilius Simplex, some senators and knights, and some women, of
whom Verulana Gratilla was the most prominent. During the first night,
owing to the carelessness of the investing force, Sabinus managed to bring
in his own children and his nephew Domitian, the future emperor.
succenso templo Iovis: for the storming of the Capitol by the Vitellians
and the burning of the temple of Capitoline Jove see Tac. iii 71 sqq.
According to Tacitus it is doubtful whether the attackers or defenders
were responsible for the conflagration; he denounces it as the most shameful
and regrettable event in the history of Rome: Id facinus post conditam
urbem luctuosissimum foedissimumque rei publicae populi Romani accidit,
nullo externo hoste, propitiis, si per mores nostros liceret, deis, sedem Iovis
Optimi Maximi auspicato a maioribus, pignus imperii conditam, quam non
Porsenna dedita urbe neque Galli capta temerare potuissent, furore principum exscindi. Tacitus sketches the history of the temple: the foundations were laid by Tarquinius Priscus, and the building progressed under
Servius Tullius and Tarquinius Superbus; it was dedicated under the free
Republic in 507 B.C.; it was burned down, by persons unknown, in 83 B.C.
when Sulla marched on Rome; Sulla undertook the restoration but did not
live to dedicate the new building (hoc solum felicitati eius negatum), this
honour was reserved for Q. Lutatius Catulus (consul 69 B.C.), and the name
of Catulus remained inscribed on the temple down to the time of Vitellius.
The temple and its history are fully described by Jordan, Topogr. Rom i 2,
8 sqq.
oppressit: when the Vitellians burst into the Capitol, any of the
Flavian officers who continued to resist were cut down. The young Domitian
succeeded in escaping (see Dom. 1, 2), as did also the sons of Sabinus and
the consul Simplex. Sabinus himself was captured along with the consul
Atticus and dragged in chains to the Palace of Vitellius. Though Vitellius
would have spared Sabinus, the rabble insisted on his being slain; Atticus
was saved by his confession, true or false, that he had fired the Capitol,
thus acquitting the Vitellians of the crime (Tac. iii 73–75).
Tiberiana domo: the Palace of Tiberius, at the back of that of
Augustus, was on the north-western part of the Palatine hill towards the
Capitoline, as is shown by this passage and by the statement that it
afforded to Otho an exit into the Velabrum (per Tiberianam domum in
Velabrum, Tac. H. i 27; see note on Oth. 6, 2, proripuit se a postica parte
Palatii). It was built by Tiberius on the site of the house of his father
(Ti. Claudius Nero) and the adjoining private mansions. At a later period
it was the favourite residence of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, who
may have added the library mentioned by Gellius (xiii 19, 1). See also on
"Palatina domus,” Vesp. 25.
inter epulas: Pitiscus comments: Epulatus est Vitellius, ‘‘ne amitteret
moriturus prandium; et redundantioribus, ut in extremis solet, mensae sibi
ultimae dapibus refarciebatur, obruebatque se vini poculis, ut sensum
amitteret futuri, vel opprobrii, vel periculi." (Hegesipp. Exscid. Hierosol.
iv 32).
7, optimus est portus
paenitens consilii; with
The pers. and impers.
paenitens facti: the use of paenitens in a personal sense, either absolutely or c. gen., is found in Cic. Phil. xii 3,
paenitenti mutatio consilii: Sall. Hist. frag. i 49,
de in Suet. Claud. 43, paenitens de matrimonio.
uses of paenitere are discussed and illustrated by Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb.
ii 287 sqq.; Neue-Wagener, Formenlehre iii 657.
in alios culpam conferens: cf. Tac. H. iii 70, where Sabinus, forced to
take refuge in the Capitol, sends an envoy to Vitellius to remonstrate with
him for violating the compact whereby he was to have withdrawn peaceably
from Rome, and Vitellius puts the blame upon his uncontrollable soldiers:
Trepidus ad haec Vitellius pauca purgandi sui causa respondit, culpam in
militem conferens, cuius nimio ardori inparem esse modestiam suam.
vocata contione: Suetonius appears to be inaccurate in stating that the
assembly at which Vitellius offered his dagger to the consul was held after
the storming of the Capitol. Tacitus (who was probably an eye-witness of
these events; see Spooner, Tac. Hist. Introd. p. 14) describes the assembly
and the attempt of Vitellius to surrender his imperial dagger as taking
place before the attack on Sabinus; see above on "sordidatus.” Dio (lxv
16) agrees with Tacitus.
iuravit coegitque iurare: there is nothing corresponding to this in Tac.
antiquius: see on Vesp. 8, 1.
§ 4. pugionem: the symbol of imperial power; see on Galb. 11, 1. Cf.
Tac. iii 68, adsistenti consuli (Caecilius Simplex erat) exsolutum a latere
pugionem, velut ius necis vitaeque civium, reddebat. Aspernante consule,
reclamantibus qui in contione adstiterant, ut in aede Concordiae positurus
insignia imperii domumque fratris petiturus discessit. Dio (lxv 16) says
that Vitellius was jeered at by the bystanders for his action: καὶ τά
ἄλλα αὐτὸν ἐκερτόμουν, καὶ μάλιστα ὁπότε τὸ ξίφος ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τοῖς τε ὑπάτοις
καὶ τοις ἄλλοις βουλευταῖς ἄρεγέν, ὡς καὶ τὴν αὐτοκράτορα ἀρχὴν δι' αὐτοῦ ἀποτεθειμένος. οὔτε γὰρ ἐκείνων τις λαβεῖν αὐτὸ ἐτόλμα, καὶ οἱ προσεστηκότες ἐχλεύαζον.
TE
consuli: Tacitus says that this consul was Caecilius Simplex, who
was one of the Flavians afterwards besieged in the Capitol and who
managed to escape when it was stormed by the Vitellians. Hofstee acutely
points out that if we accept the sequence of events given by Suetonius we
must assume that the consul immediately after his escape ventured to
appear at a public assembly, which is almost incredible.
aede Concordiae: this temple (τὸ Ὁμονόειον, Dio lv 8) on the Clivus
Capitolinus overlooking the Forum was founded by Camillus in 367 B.c.,
and restored and rededicated in 12 A.D. by Tiberius (Suet. Tib. 20).
It
was used as a meeting-place for the senate (e.g. Cic. Cat. iii 9, 21, Phil. ii
8, 19), and in the 3rd cent. A.D. is called curia ("senate-house''), cf.
Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 6, cum senatus frequens in curiam, hoc est in aedem
Concordiae templum inauguratum, convenisset. See Jordan, Topogr.
Rom i 2, 336 sqq.; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ '928.
Concordiae cognomen: there is no other reference to this as a
cognomen of Vitellius. “Concordia" is found as a woman's name in
several inscriptions; e.g. C.I.L. vi 2145, Coeliae Concordiae virgini Vestali
maximae. The goddess Concordia appears on coins of the emperors from
Nero onwards (Cohen, Méd. imp.2 Néron 66, 67, Vitellius 13-16, etc.).
Torrentius compares the assumption of the cognomen "Pietas" by
L. Antonius who pretended that he was only opposing Caesar in the
interests of his brother M. Antonius, the triumvir (Dio xlviii 5; Sturz ad
loc. cites as a modern parallel the assumption of the title "Citoyen
Égalité" by the Duke of Orleans at the time of the French Revolution).
CHAPTER 16.
suasit senatui, ut . . mitterent: for the constructio ad sensum cf. 10, 1;
15, 1; Galb. 10, 2.
legatos: Tac. iii 80, Mox vocato senatu deliguntur legati ad exercitus,
ut praetexto rei publicae concordiam pacemque suaderent. The envoys
were sent to Antonius Primus, who was advancing by the Via Flaminia,
and to Petilius Cerealis, who was advancing by the Via Salaria. The
envoys who met Cerealis were rudely rejected; one of them, the praetor
Arulenus Rusticus (the Stoic, afterwards executed by Domitian, Dom. 10),
was wounded and his lictor killed. Those who met Antonius were more
favourably received, as his troops were under better control. Tacitus
mentions that the famous Stoic philosopher, Musonius Rufus, a man of
equestrian rank, went with the envoys and expatiated to the troops on
the perils of war and the blessings of peace; fortunately for himself, he
was persuaded to desist from displaying his ill-timed wisdom (intempestiva
sapientia).
virginibus Vestalibus: the Vestals were sent to Antonius with a
letter from Vitellius asking for a delay of one day that a settlement
might be arranged. The sacred virgins were sent back with honour, but
the answer returned to Vitellius was that his slaying of Sabinus and
burning of the Capitol had broken off all the usual courtesies of war
(dirempta belli commercia, Tac. c. 81). Dio, lxv 18, says that it was to
Cerealis that the Vestals (ἀειπαρθένοι) were sent. The veneration accorded
to the Vestals lent great weight to their intercessions. Julius Caesar in
his early youth owed his pardon by Sulla to their pleadings (Suet. Iul. 1, 2,
per virgines Vestales
veniam impetravit). Cf. also Tac. A. xi 32,
Messalina .Vibidiam virginum Vestalium vetustissimam oravit pontificis:
maximi (i.e. the emperor Claudius) aures adire, clementiam expetere: id.
A. iii 69: Val. Max. v 4, 6: Cic. Font. 17, 48.
hostem appropinquare: Tacitus (iii 82) describes the advance of the
forces of Vespasian in three divisions, the centre along the Via Flaminia,
the right wing along the banks of the Tiber, the left along the Via
Salaria to the Colline Gate. The rabble and slaves had been armed by
the Vitellians, and they tried to prevent the enemy entering, but were
driven back into the city. Fierce fighting took place in the streets, recalling
the days of Sulla and Cinna. With the storming of the praetorian camp
(held by Germanic soldiers, whom Vitellius substituted for the praetorian
cohorts which he disbanded) the Flavian army broke down the opposition
and the city passed into their hands. According to some accounts 50,000
perished in this capture of Rome.
continuo: Tacitus (c. 84) says that it was after the capture of the city
that Vitellius sought concealment in the house of his wife (not his father)
on the Aventine: Vitellius capta urbe per aversam Palatii partem Aventinum
in domum uxoris sellula defertur.
abstrusus gestatoria sella: see on Oth. 6, 3, abditus propere muliebri
sella. For petit = petiit cf. Oth. 7, 1 n.
in Campaniam: where his brother Lucius had captured Tarracina;
see on c. 15, 2. The design of Vitellius to escape to Campania is mentioned also by Tac. (c. 84), ut si diem latebra vitavisset, Tarracinam ad
cohortes fratremque perfugeret: Dio lxv 20, γνώμην ἔχων τῆς νυκτὸς ἐς τὴν
Ταρρακῖναν πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἀποδρᾶναι.
rumore
..,
tamquam pax impetrata esset: a clause with tamquam
(as with quasi, see on Tit. 5, 3) often takes the place of the acc. c. inf. in
post-class. Latin; cf. Aug. 6, tenet vicinitatem opinio, tamquam natus ibi
sit: Aug. 94, 8, quem (puerum) cum detrahi iussisset, prohibitus monitu
dei, tamquam is ad tutelam rei p. educaretur.
referri se in Palatium: Tacitus (c. 84) attributes this return, not
to any rumours of peace, but to the characteristic vacillation of Vitellius:
dein mobilitate ingenii et, quae natura pavoris est, cum omnia metuenti
praesentia maxime displicerent, in Palatium regreditur.
deserta omnia: Tac. (l.c.): Palatium vastum desertumque, dilapsis
etiam infimis servitiorum aut occursum eius declinantibus. Terret solitudo
et tacentes loci; tentat clausa, inhorrescit vacuis.
simul erant: Bentley conjectured simul ierant (G has simulaverant).
zona: money was often carried in a belt and zona was used in the
sense of "purse"; cf. Hor. Ep. ii 2, 40, ibit eo quo vis qui zonam perdidit:
Gracchus ap. Gell. xv 12, cum Romam profectus sum, zonas, quas plenas
argenti extuli, eas ex provincia inanes rettuli: Liv. xxxiii 29, negotiandi
ferme causa argentum in zonis habentes. Plautus (Trin. 862) uses sector
zonarius for a "cut-purse” (βαλαντιοτόμος).
aureorum: see on Galb. 20, 2.
cellulam ianitoris: cf. Oros. vii 8, cum se in quandam proximam
Palatio cellulam contrusisset. There was a small hut or lodge for the
porter or doorkeeper beside the entrance to the Palace: Aur. Vict., Caes. 8,
calls it "tugurium ianitoris." The small rooms of servants were called
cellae (servorum, familiares, etc.); and they were sometimes designated
as occupied by a particular functionary; e.g. cella atriensis (cf. Calig. 57).
The cella ianitoris was also called cella ostiarii (Petron. Satyr. 29). Dio, lxv
20, says that Vitellius hid in a dark room where the dogs were kept:
ὁ Οὐιτέλλιος φοβηθεὶς χιτωνίσκον τε ῥακώδη καὶ ῥυπαρὸν ἐνέδυ, καὶ ἐς οἴκημα σκοτεινόν,
ἐν ᾧ ἐτρέφοντο κύνες, ἐκρύφθη. Tacitus (c. 84) uses a vague phrase: pudenda
latebra semet occultans.
religato pro foribus cane: the custom of having watch-dogs chained
near the porter's cella is illustrated in the description of Trimalchio's house
where there was a figure of an enormous dog in mosaic or colours
on the wall, and also a live watch-dog, Scylax ("Barker'") chained
at the door: Petron. Satyr. 29, ad sinistram intrantibus non longe ab
ostiarii cella canis ingens, catena vinctus, in pariete erat pictus superque
quadrata littera ("in capital letters'') scriptum “CAVE CANEM”: ib.
64, Trimalchio Scylacem iussit adduci nec mora ingentis formae adductus est canis catena vinctus, admonitusque ostiarii calce, ut cubaret, ante
mensam se posuit: ib. 72, ad ianuam venimus, ubi canis catenarius tanto
nos tumultu excepit, ut Ascyltos etiam in piscinam ceciderit.
culcita: "mattress"; cf. Ner. 48, 4, receptus in proximam cellam decubuit super lectum modica culcita: Tib. 54, 2, Druso autem adeo alimenta
subducta, ut tomentum (“stuffing'") e culcita temptaverit mandere: Sen.
Ep. 87, culcita in terra iacet, ego in culcita: Petron. Satyr. 97, institis
quibus sponda culcitam ferebat (i.e. the webbing which held up the mattress
on the frame of the bed). "culcita” is used at times to denote a pillow
(cervical); the emperor Claudius was so apprehensive of assassination that
he would never visit a sick person “nisi explorato prius cubiculo culcitisque
et stragulis praetemptatis et excussis'' (Claud. 35, 1).
CHAPTER 17.
agminis antecessores: the advanced guard (of the Flavians), cf. Auct.
Bell. Afr. 12, per speculatores et antecessores equites nuntiatur. Another
military term for advanced parties was antecursores (πρόδρομοι), e.g. Caes.
B.G. v 47; Livy uses praecursores.
nemine: this ablative (for nullo or nulla) does not occur in class. Lat.;
the only apparent instance, Cic. orat. tog. cand. frag. 19, neque alio nemine
is corrected by Müller into ne quem alium nominem; it is found in Plautus
and in post-Aug. writers (3 times in Justin, twice in Tac., and 9 times in
Suet.). See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. ii 128.
On the other hand, Suetonius
uses nullo = nemine 7 times, e.g. Vitell. 15, 4: Vesp. 11.
..
rimabantur: cf. Tac. H. ii 29, spolia occultari clamitantes (milites
seditiosi) tabernacula ducis ipsamque humum pilis et lanceis rimabantur.
Suetonius does not use the verb elsewhere.
ab his extractus: Tacitus is more definite: H. iii 84, ab Iulio Placido,
tribuno cohortis, protrahitur.
sciscitantes
ubi esse Vitellium sciret: Madvig would read ubi
esset Vitellius num sciret; Bentley ecubi esset Vitellius. Bremi explains
the text as meaning "asking him where he knew that Vitellius was"; the
form of expression implying that the captors assumed that he did know.
Baumg.-Cr. (iii 837) regards the passage as an instance of a “duplex
sententia in unam contracta,” the meaning being the same as if Suetonius
had actually written num sciret ubi esset Vitellius, and he thinks that the
acc. c. inf. (instead of the subjunct. esset) is similar to the ordinary use in
orat. obl. of this constr. in questions with the first or third person. This
is also the view of Freund (De Suet. genere dicendi p. 6), but neither he
nor Baumg.-Cr. cites any parallel for the omission of num. The text seems
scarcely defensible, and perhaps Madvig's correction should be adopted,
though I would prefer si sciret to his num sciret; the loss of si between
Vitellius and sciret would account for the rest of the corruption. For si
(= num) in indirect questions see Kühner-Stegmann, ii 426.
ignorabatur: for this use of ignorari cf. Tac. H. iii 74, Domitianus
prima inruptione apud aedituum occultatus,
lineo amictu turbae sacricolarum inmixtus ignoratusque:
ib. iv 36, servili habitu per tenebras
ignoratus evasit: Ter. Phorm. 930, fugitive, etiam nunc credis te
ignorarier?
vel in carcere: i.e. in the old state prison; he did not claim the
privilege of being kept merely in the libera custodia of some distinguished
citizen (see on c. 2, 3, in custodiam fratri datus). The carcer (called
Mamertinus in mediaeval Latin) was situated between the temple of Concord
and the Curia at the foot of the Capitol.
religatis
manibus, etc.: Tac. iii 84, Vinctae pone tergum manus;
lacerata veste, foedum spectaculum ducebatur (sc. laqueo): Dio lxv 20,
τὴν ἐσθῆτα αὐτοῦ περιρρήξαντες, καὶ τὰ χεῖρε εἰς τοὐπίσω δήσαντες, τῷ τε αὐχένι
σχοινίον περιθέντες, κατήγαγον ἐκ τοῦ παλατίου τὸν Καίσαρα τὸν ἐν αὐτῷ ἐντρυφήσαντα.
seminudus: this rare compound is first found in Livy, e.g. ix 6, consules
prope seminudi sub iugum missi. Other compounds with semi- in Suet. are
semiambustus, semianimis, semibarbarus, semicrudus, semesus, semigraecus,
semiperfectus, semiustus, semiustulandus.
Forum: where he had often addressed the people; Dio (l.c.), ἔς τε τὴν
ἀγορὰν ἐσεκόμισαν τὸν Αὔγουστον, ἐν ᾗ πολλάκις ἐδημηγόρησε.
inter ludibria: Dio (l.c.), οἱ μὲν ἐρράπιζον αὐτόν, οἱ δὲ τοῦ γενείου ἔτιλλον,
πάντες δὲ ἔσκωπτον καὶ πάντες ὕβριζον. Josephus also mentions the despiteful
treatment of Vitellius, Bell. Iud. iv 11, 4, συρεὶς δὲ διὰ τοῦ πλήθους καὶ παντοδαπαῖς αἰκίαις ἐξυβρισθεὶς ἐπὶ μέσης τῆς ῾Ρώμης ἀποσφάττεται. Tacitus (l.c.) says:
multis increpantibus, nullo inlacrimante, deformitas exitus misericordiam
abstulerat.
viae Sacrae: down from the Palace to the Forum, the road along which
he had so often proudly ridden in state; Dio (l.c.), διὰ τῆς ἱερᾶς ὁδοῦ ἔσυραν
τὸν αὐτοκράτορα τὸν ἐν τῷ βασιλικῷ δίφρῳ πολλάκις σοβήσαντα.
reducto coma capite: the head was drawn back to make the criminal
expose his face to the gaze of all; cf. Plin. Pan. 34, describing the informers being led through the arena with their faces forcibly upturned
to the spectators in the amphitheatre: nihil saeculo dignius quam quod
contigit desuper intueri delatorum supina ora retortasque cervices.
ceu noxii solent: sc. trahi; cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, iniecto laqueo, parricidarum more, ad scalas Gemonias pertractus. Casaubon prefers ceu
noxiis solet. The adv. ceu (= velut) is used in poetry (Catull., Lucr., Verg.,
Hor.) and in later prose (Colum., Sen., and especially Plin. N.H.); cf. Suet.
Tib. 52, 2, victorias ceu damnosas rei publicae increparet.
mento mucrone gladii subrecto: Tac. (l.c.), Vitellium infestis
mucronibus coactum erigere os et offerre contumeliis
propulere: Dio
1xv 21, αἰσχυνομένου τε ἐπὶ τούτοις αὐτοῦ καὶ κάτω βλέποντος, οἱ στρατιῶται ξιφιδίοις
αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τὸ γένειον ὑπεκέντουν, ἵνα καὶ ἄκων (vel invitus) ἄνω βλέπῃ : [Aur. Vict.]
Epit. 8, ne homo impudens in extremis saltem malorum, quae gesserat,
rubore faciem demitteret, subiecto in mentum gladio: Eutrop. vii 18, 5,
erecto coma capite et subiecto ad mentum gladio. The reading subiecto in
these last two passages is found also in most of the later MSS. of Suet.,
and appears in the ed. Veneta (1471). The act. use of subrigo (surgo)
occurs in Verg. Aen. iv 183, tot surrigit aures; in Livy, e.g. vii 10 mucrone
subrecto, viii 8 hastas subrecta cuspide in terra fixas; later in Sen., Plin.
N.H., Stat., Sil. Ital., etc.
§ 2. stercore et caeno incessentibus: Eutrop. (l.c.), stercore in vultum
et pectus ab omnibus obviis appetitus: Aur. Vict. (l.c.), multis caeno
fimoque et ceteris turpioribus dictu purgamentis vultum eius incessentibus:
Oros. vii 8, 8, passim fimum in os eius coniectantibus.
incendiarium: referring to his burning of the Capitol (c. 15, 3). Nero
also was reviled as an "incendiarius” for having caused the great fire
which devastated Rome in his reign (Tac. A. xv 67).
patinarium: “trencherman'” “gormandizer," with special reference to
his famous patina described in c. 13, 2.
corpore
enormis proceritas: cf. Calig. 50, statura fuit eminenti
enormi. The adj. enormis is post-Aug. and means (1) huge, enormous,
(2) shapeless, constructed on no plan or rule (norma), e.g. enormes vici,
Tac. A. xv 38.
rubida: a Plautine adj.; cf. Gell. ii 26, 14, ‘rubidus” autem est rufus
atrior et nigrore multo inustus.
venter obesus: Dio lxv 20, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ τὴν ἀσωτίαν αὐτοῦ ἐπιλέγοντες
(exprobrantes), ἐπειδὴ καὶ γαστροπίων (ventre obeso) ἦν. Cf. Dom. 18, deformis obesitate ventris: Ner. 51, ventre proiecto: Tit. 3, 1, ventre paulo
proiectiore.
subdebile: this word apparently does not occur elsewhere. Suetonius
also uses subflavus (Aug. 79, 2; Ner. 51), and subrutilus (Dom. 20).
olim: in Latin, as in Greek, adverbs are often used like adjectives;
see the examples given by Kühner-Stegmann, i 218 sq.: Nägelsbach, Lat.
Stilistik § 75.
quadrigae: the sing. quadriga is poetical and occurs at times in post-class. prose. Gellius (xix 8, 17) notices its use by Varro: “quod unum
ergo rarissimum videbatur, invenimus quadrigam numero singulari dictum
in libro saturarum M. Varronis qui inscriptus est Ecdemeticus." Suetonius
also uses the post-Aug. sing. biga (Tib. 26, 1).
auriganti Gaio: see on c. 4, Gaio per aurigandi studium familiaris.
cum ministratorem exhiberet: for the ellipse of se cf. Quintil. xii 2, 7,
qui vere civilem virum exhibeat: Justin xxvii 2, pro fratre hostem exhibuit: Ov. Met. vi 43, formamque removit anilem | Palladaque exhibuit.
Several of the MSS. (GPOST) give ministratorem se. Vitellius may have
been acting as one of the sparsores, whose duty seems to have been either
to refresh the horses or to pour water on the wheels of the chariot to
prevent their taking fire (Daremberg-Saglio, i 1199). For Dio's mention
of Vitellius rubbing down or currying the horses of the Blue faction in the
Circus see note on "factionis Venetae,” c. 7, 1.
apud Gemonias: Tac. iii 85, Vitellium ... postremo ad Gemonias,
ubi corpus Flavii Sabini iacuerat, propulere. Una vox non degeneris animi
excepta, cum tribuno insultanti se tamen imperatorem eius fuisse respondit.
Ac deinde ingestis volneribus concidit. The full phrase Gemoniae scalae
occurs in Val. Max. vi 3, ix 13, Oros. vii 8; but the subst. is regularly
omitted in Tac. and Suet. Pliny (N.H. viii 145) uses gradus gemitorii.
These "Stairs of Groanings" were a flight of steps from the Capitol to
the Forum, near the Mamertine prison; on them the bodies of executed
criminals were exposed (e.g. that of Sejanus for 3 days, Dio lviii 11). We
find no mention of the Gemoniae (scalae) before the time of Tiberius. See
Jordan, Topogr. Rom i 2, 324. Dio (lxv 21) says that when the soldiers
dragged Vitellius to the Gemoniae (πρὸς τοὺς ἀναβαθμούς), they slew him and
cut off his head which they carried round the city, and that the body was
buried by his wife Galeria Fundana; but according to Eutrop. vii 18, 5
(followed by Oros. vii 8, 8) ‘“in Tiberim deiectus etiam communi caruit
sepultura."
2 в
minutissimis ictibus: cf. the fiendish cruelty of Caligula described in
Calig. 30, 1, Non temere in quemquam nisi crebris et minutis ictibus animadverti passus est, perpetuo notoque iam praecepto: ‘“Ita feri ut se mori
sentiat." Josephus (Ant. Iud. xix 1, 107) mentions that Chaerea arranged
that Caligula himself should be slain by the conspirators with a multitude
of wounds: προνοίᾳ τοῦ Χαιρέου . · τὸ μὴ μιᾷ πληγῇ διεργάσασθαι τὸν Γάϊον, ἀλλὰ
τιμωρεῖσθαι μειζόνως πλήθει τραυμάτων.
excarnificatus: this compound is found earlier in Cicero, N.D. iii 33,
82, Anaxarchum Democriteum a Cyprio tyranno excarnificatum accepimus.
Seneca has it once of bodily tortures (Ep. 24 mille alia instrumenta excarnificandi particulatim hominis) and twice of mental anguish (Ira iii 4, 3:
Clem. i 16, 33 so too in Ter. Heaut. 813). Livy (xxiv 15) uses the simple
verb carnificare. Suetonius does not mention here what is related by Dio
(lxv 21) that the first wound dealt to Vitellius was by a Gallic (?) soldier
out of pity for his humiliating sufferings: ἰδὼν δὲ τοῦτο Κελτός τις, οὐκ
ἤνεγκεν, ἀλλ' ἐλεήσας αὐτόν “ ἐγώ σοι,” ἔφη “ βοηθήσω, ὡς μόνως δύναμαι.” καὶ ὁ
μὲν ἐκεῖνόν τε ἔτρωσε καὶ ἑαυτὸν ἔσφαξεν. οὐ μέντοι καὶ ὁ Οὐιτέλλιος ἀπέθανεν ἐκ τοῦ
τραύματος. Tacitus (iii 84) suggests various explanations for this soldier's
action: Obvius e Germanicis militibus Vitellium infesto ictu per iram vel
quo maturius ludibrio eximeret an tribunum adpetierit, in incerto fuit:
aurem tribuni amputavit ac statim confossus est (the tribune referred to
is Julius Placidus who had dragged Vitellius from his hiding-place).
unco tractus in Tiberim: when criminals were strangled in the
Mamertine prison, their bodies were dragged by a hook to the Gemoniae
scalae and after being exposed there for some time were dragged to the
Tiber; cf. Suet. Tib. 54, 2, cum ei carnifex laqueos et uncos ostentaret:
ib. 61, 4, nemo punitorum non in Gemonias abiectus uncoque tractus: ib.
75, 1, alii uncum et Gemonias cadaveri minarentur: Juv. x 66, Seianus
ducitur unco (where see Mayor): Ov. Ibis 163, carnificisque manu populo
plaudente traheris | infixusque tuis ossibus uncus erit. Tacitus (A. vi 19)
gives a gruesome picture of those executed by Tiberius for complicity with
Sejanus; their bodies were cast down the Gemoniae and lay guarded by
soldiers till corruption began; they were then dragged by the flesh-hook
to the Tiber. Dio (lx 35) relates a jest of Gallio, Seneca's brother, on
the "deification of the emperor Claudius: ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοὺς ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ
(carcere) θανατουμένους ἀγκίστροις (uncis) τισὶ μεγάλοις οἱ δήμιοι (carnifices) es te
τὴν ἀγορὰν (forum) ἀνεῖλκον, κἀντεῦθεν ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν (Tiberim) ἔσυρον, ἔφη τὸν
Κλαύδιον ἀγκίστρῳ ἐς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀνενεχθῆναι.
CHAPTER 18.
periit cum fratre: Lucius Vitellius had set out from Tarracina in
Campania (see on c. 15, 2) to bring help to his brother Aulus, the emperor,
but learned on his march of his death; he was met by forces sent by
Antonius Primus, and surrendered to them. Dio (lxv 22) says that they
agreed to spare his life; but he and his followers were brought captive to
Rome and thrown into prison, and shortly afterwards Lucius was executed.
Tacitus mentions his death, and describes his character in very unfavourable
terms: H. iv 2, dein Lucius Vitellius interficitur, par vitiis fratris, in
principatu eius vigilantior, nec perinde prosperis socius quam adversis
abstractus ("dragged down by his brother's fall''): iii 77, quippe L.
Vitellio quamvis infami inerat industria; nec virtutibus, ut boni, sed
quomodo pessimus quisque, vitiis valebat.
filio: named Germanicus; see on c. 6, de hac (i.e. Galeria Fundana)
liberos tulit. Dio (l.c.) says that he was put to death at the same time
as his uncle Lucius Vitellius. According to the account in Tacitus (iv 80)
the execution of Germanicus did not take place for nearly a year after the
death of his father, the execution being ordered by Mucianus, Vespasian's
general, who had made himself all-powerful at Rome: Isdem diebus
Mucianus Vitellii filium interfici iubet, mansuram discordiam obtendens
(''alleging'"), ni semina belli restinxisset.
anno vitae septimo quinquagesimo: so Tac. iii 86, septimum et quinquagesimum aetatis annum explebat: Eutrop. vii 18, periit aetatis
anno septimo et quinquagesimo: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 8, vixit annos quinquaginta septem. This, however, is irreconcilable with the date of his
birth as given by Suetonius in c. 3, 2, viz. Sept. 24, 15 A.D. If he was
born then and slain on Dec. 22 (?), 69 A.D., he was only aged 54 years and
89 days at his death, which is what is stated in Dio lxv 22 (Zonar. xi 16).
Such chronological discrepancies with regard to the age, etc., of the
emperors are frequent in Suetonius (see on Galb. 23; Oth. 11, 2; Tit. 11).
No satisfactory explanation of them has been suggested: Reimar (on
Dio l.c.) assumes that Suetonius took the dates of birth and the ages of
the emperors at death from different authorities and did not trouble to
consider whether they were consistent. Suetonius does not state the length
of Vitellius' reign, which is variously given by other authors; e.g. by Dio
(Zonar.) as 1 year all but 10 days (Vitellius was first saluted as Imperator
by the army in Germany on Jan. 3); by Aur. Vict. as 8 months (the day
of his accession being Apr. 19, see on Oth. 11, 2); by Josephus (Bell. Iud.
iv 11, 4) as 8 months and 5 days; by Eutropius as 8 months and 1 day;
by Tertullian (adv. Iud. 8) as 8 months and 27 days. See Dessau, Prosop.
Imp. Rom. iii 450.
augurio Viennae: see c. 9.
Gallicani hominis: the adj. Gallicanus was specially used with reference
to the provinces of Gallia Cisalpina and Gallia Narbonensis. In Suet. Ner.
43, 1 “Gallicani homines” are the inhabitants of Cisalpine Gaul, and in
Cic. Cat. ii 3, 5 "Gallicanae legiones" are the troops stationed in that
province. In Cic. Quinct. 25, 80 ‘‘fundus Gallicanus" is used of an estate
held by a Roman in Narbonese Gaul, and it is to this province that Suet.
is referring here. See also R. Ellis on Catull. 42, 9, catuli Gallicani.
Antonio Primo: born in Gaul, he became a senator at Rome, but was
banished under Nero for forgery: he was restored by Galba and given
command of the 7th legion (Galbiana) in Pannonia: he offered his services
to Otho but was rejected: he induced the legions in Pannonia and Moesia
to declare for Vespasian: he defeated the Vitellian forces at Betriacum,
stormed Cremona, and entered Rome at the head of his victorious army:
for a brief time he exercised an almost autocratic power at Rome, but on
the arrival of Mucianus he was reduced to a subordinate position (Tас. Н.
iv 11): incensed at this he went to Alexandria to complain to Vespasian,
but was coldly received by him; later we hear of him as a friend and patron
of Martial who (Epigr. x 23) mentions him as living peacefully at the age
2B2
of 75 in 98 A.D. Tacitus (H. ii 86) thus describes Antonius: Labantibus
Vitellii rebus Vespasianum secutus grande momentum addidit, strenuus
manu, sermone promptus, serendae in alios invidiae artifex, discordiis et
seditionibus potens, raptor largitor, pace pessimus, bello non spernendus.
Tolosae: mod. Toulouse, in Gallia Narbonensis, on the Garumna
(Garonne); it was the capital of the Tolosani or Tolosates; captured by
the Romans in 106 B.c., it afterwards became a colonia Latina. It is
mentioned as the birthplace of Marcus Antonius Primus in Mart. ix 99, 3,
Marcus Palladiae non infitianda Tolosae. | gloria, quem genuit Pacis alumna
Quies (the epithet Palladia, applied to Tolosa also by Auson. and Sidon.
Apollin., marks it as a centre of the literary culture of Gaul).
..
..
cui cognomen Becco fuerat: Becco is probably dat. by attraction
to cui; cf. Iul. 59, cui Salvitoni cognomen erat: Aug. 7, 1, infanti
cognomen Thurino inditum est. This attraction is very frequent in Plaut.;
in Cic. both nom. and dat. are used; in Caes. only nom.; in Liv. the dat. is
the more usual; Tac. only uses the dat. with adjs., e.g. A. i 31, cui nomen
Superiori. The name in the gen. is first found in post-Aug. writers; e.g.
Suet. Calig. 60, quibus Gai praenomen fuit: Tac. A. xii 55, nationes quibus
Clitarum cognomentum: Val. Max. i 8, cui nomen erat Equi. See KühnerStegmann i 420. beccus (Ital. becco, Fr. bec, Eng. beak) seems to be a
Gallic word. As a proper name it occurs in C.I.L. xii 2514, deo Apollini
Beccus ex voto. A derivative is Becciacus vicus (Bessay, Vendée),
Greg. Tur. glor. Mart. 89. Becco is another form of the name: C.I.L. xii
5381, (Tolosae) deo Silvan(o) dom(estico) Becco v.s.l.m. (i.e. votum solvit
libenter merito); also found in Greg. Tur. Iul. 16. Becca as the name of a
cinaedus occurs in Anth. 321, 3.
valet: = significat; cf. Varr. R.R. i 31, ὠκέως valet cito: Cic. Fin.
ii 4, 13, quaerimus verbum Latinum par Graeco et quod idem valeat:
Quintil. x 1, 13, et “intellego” et “sentio” et “video” saepe idem valent
quod “scio.” So δύνασθαι, e.g. Thucyd. vii 58, τὸ νεοδαμῶδες δύναται (valet)
ἐλεύθερον εἶναι.
gallinacei: see on c. 9. Suetonius does not mention the coincidence
between gallus (a cock) and Gallus (a Gaul).
CHAPTER 1.
rebellione: rebellare in Suet. (Iul. 75, 3: Aug. 21, 2: Vesp. 4, 5) has
its ordinary meaning of bellum renovare; and rebellio is so used in Calig.
51, 3, audita rebellione Germaniae. Here, however, rebellio seems to be
used in the more general sense of an armed revolt against the government
to which one owes allegiance, a tyrannical usurpation of authority. Galba,
Otho, and Vitellius are described as "tyranni" in Oros. vii 9, anno ab
urbe condita octingentesimo vigesimo quinto, brevi illa quidem sed turbida.
tyrannorum tempestate discussa, tranquilla sub Vespasiano duce serenitas
rediit. Marcilius cites the Gloss. Cyrill. rebellio ἀπόστασις: rebellis ἀποστάτης, τύραννος.
vagum: shifting (fluxum), unsettled, insecurely based or established,
opp. to stabile; cf. Cic. N.D. ii 1, de dis immortalibus habere non errantem
et vagam, ut Academici, sed ut nostri, stabilem certamque sententiam.
suscepit firmavitque: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, Vespasianus
diu fessumque terrarum orbem brevi refecit.
exsanguem
gens Flavia: Flavius, as a plebeian gentile name, in the last three
centuries of the Republic was fairly widespread throughout Italy, not merely
in the Sabine territory, but in Lucania, Etruria, etc. Under the Empire
it is found with greater frequency after the rise to power of the Flavian
dynasty.
..
illa quidem sed tamen: this use of ille with quidem (in a concessive sense) followed by a qualification introduced by sed or tamen or
sed tamen is common in Cic.; e.g. Tusc. iii 35, tarda illa quidem medicina,
sed tamen magna. Outside Cic. it is very rarely found (Nep. 18, 1, 1:
Plin. Ep. ii 5, 11: Sall. Iug. 24, 9: Ov. Met. v 506: isolated instances in
Apul. and Stat.). See Kühner-Stegmann, i 623 sq.
This is the only instance in Suet.
sine ullis maiorum imaginibus: cf. Aug. 4, 1, multis in familia
senatoriis imaginibus (so Sall. Iug. 85, homo veteris prosapiae et multarum
imaginum): Galb. 3, 1, imagines et elogia (= titulos) universi generis exsequi longum est: Calig. 23, 1, Agrippae se nepotem neque credi neque
dici ob ignobilitatem eius volebat succendebatque, si qui vel oratione vel
carmine imaginibus (= maioribus) eum Caesarum insererent. The ius
imaginum distinguished the nobiles at Rome, being the privilege of those
who held curule magistracies. See on Galb. 2, stemma in atrio.
rei p. nequaquam paenitenda: the gerundive paenitendus is found first
in Livy, e.g. i 35, 5, sub haud paenitendo magistro: xl 56, 3, neque
pudendum aut paenitendum eum regem fore. For the personal use of
paenitere, which justifies a gerundive, see on Vitell. 15, 3.
cupiditatis: cf. Dom. 9, 1, where cupiditas is coupled with avaritia
and they are opposed respectively to abstinentia and liberalitas. In Vesp.
16, 1 we find the full phrase cupiditas pecuniae, but elsewhere simply
cupiditas (e.g. Galb. 14, 2, cupiditatis immensae: Vesp. 19, 1: Dom. 10, 1).
saevitiae: the cruelty of Domitian is illustrated in Dom. 10.
,
poenas luisse: cf. Suet. Rhet. 6 paene poenas luit (but Calig. 37, 3,
сит morae culpa capite lueretur). Servius (on Aen. x 32 peccata luant)
censures the loose expression luere poenam for luere peccatum:‘“Dicimus
et 'luo poenam, sed melius est ‘luo peccatum': nam peccatum solvitur
poena. Qui enim crimine tenetur obnoxius, poena eum a pristina liberat
obligatione. Contra, ‘luo poenam' si dixeris, non procedit, quasi poena
solvatur. Auctoritas tamen ista confundit licenter more, quo solet poni,
vel a sequenti, quod praecedit: vel a praecedenti, quod sequitur."
phrase luere poenas is, however, used by Cicero, etc.
The
§ 2. municeps Reatinus: Reāte (mod. Rieti) was a very ancient Sabine
city in a fertile valley (Cic. Att. iv 15, 5; Verg. Aen. vii 712) on the banks
of the river and lake Velinus. In Cicero's time it was merely a praefectura
(see Mayor on Cic. N.D. ii 2). We learn from inscriptions that in 27 B.C.
under the early Empire it had municipal privileges and its own magistrates
(C.I.L. ix 4686), and that under Vespasian a number of veterans were
settled there, though it did not obtain the rank of a colonia (C.I.L. ix 4682-
4685). Suetonius seems to be using municeps anachronistically here when
referring to the period of the civil war between Julius Caesar and Pompey,
while Reate was still a praefectura.
..
centurio an evocatus: the form of disjunctive questions became so
abbreviated that an came to be used almost as identical with aut or vel
(Kühner-Stegmann, ii 527); this use is found in Cic., e.g. Fin. ii 104, сит
ei Simonides an quis alius polliceretur (a fuller form in Cic. Acad. ii 63,
iocansne an ita sentiens); it is common in poetry and late Lat., e.g. Tac.
A. ii 42, finem vitae sponte an fato implevit: Suet. Claud. 13, 2, casu
quodam an divinitus. See also on Oth. 1, 1, matre incertum an ingenua.
evocatus: cf. Galb. 10, 3.
The evocati (ἀνάκλητοι) were time-expired
veterans who were invited to renew their service under very favourable
conditions. They were exempt from ordinary duties and ranked above the
privates (gregarii), apparently as the equals of centurions (we find evocati
and centuriones coupled, e.g. in Caes. В.С. і 17, 4 iii 53, 1; the same man
is called evocatus in Vell. Pat. ii 70, 3 and centurio or ἑκατόνταρχος in
Val. Max. ix 9, 2, Dio xlvii 46). See Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 387 sqq.
Pharsalica acie: the decisive battle at Pharsalus in Thessaly where
Pompey was defeated by Julius Caesar in 48 B.C.
venia: in Iul. 75 Suetonius describes and illustrates the wonderful selfrestraint and mercy of Caesar in his hour of victory: moderationem
clementiamque cum in administratione tum in victoria belli civilis admirabilem exhibuit.
missione: for the honesta missio see on Vitell. 15, 1.
coactiones argentarias: the argentarii or bankers at Rome conducted
private sales or public auctions. At auctions they registered the articles
sold, their prices and purchasers, and received the payments; cf. Ner. 5, 2,
argentarios pretiis rerum coemptarum fraudaverit: Cic. Caecin. 6, 16:
Sen. Controv. i praef. 19, Hortensius a Sisenna provocatus in auctione
persedit per diem totum et omnes res et pretia et emptores ordine suo
argentariis recognoscentibus ita ut in nulla re falleretur recensuit. At
times they used their clerks or servants as collectors (coactores) of the
payments. Horace's father was a coactor (Hor. S. i 6, 86; cf. Suet. vit.
Horat. 1, patre libertino et exactionum coactore).
primipilarem: primipilaris (on the analogy of consularis, etc.) is used
by post-Aug. writers for one who had held the highest position as centurion.
The legion consisted of 10 cohorts, each cohort containing 2 centuries (or
1 maniple) of each of the three divisions hastati, principes, and pilani
(the pilani were earlier known as triarii; each ordo of pilani was called
a pilus). The cohorts ranked according to their numbers (the tenth being
the lowest), and the 60 centurions in the legion rose in an ascending scale,
the lowest being the subordinate centurion of the hastati of the tenth
cohort (decumus hastatus posterioris centuriae); the highest was usually
called primus pilus (also primipilus, primi pili centurio, primi ordinis
centurio), and was regarded as the best soldier in the legion, being called
in to the military councils along with the tribunes. See Marquardt, op.
cit. ii² 360 sqq.
ordines duceret: the phrase ordinem ducere meant to be a centurion'';
cf. Tac. H. ii 22, (Cerealis) primipilaris et Caecinae haud alienus, quod
ordines in Germania duxerat (i.e. had been a centurion under him in G.):
Caes. B.C. i 13, L. Pupius primi pili centurio, qui hunc eundem ordinem
in exercitu Cn. Pompei antea duxerat. Caesar uses ordo ten times in the
sense of centuria.
sacramento solutum : the oath (sacramentum) taken by a soldier
joining the Roman army was binding on him till he got his discharge
(missio). A discharge was of 3 kinds: (a) honesta missio after the legal
term of service had expired (see on Vitell. 15, 1); (b) causaria missio
through physical disablement or ill-health; (c) ignominiosa missio, summary
dismissal for serious offences. For (b) cf. Ulp. Dig. iii 2, 2, missio est
causaria quae propter valetudinem laboribus militiae solvit (militem);
those so incapacitated were called causarii (cf. Liv. vi 6, 14: Spartian.
Hadr. 10, etc.). Marquardt, op. cit. 384.
per causam: here of a genuine reason, but more frequently of a
pretence or pretext (= sub praetextu, ἐπὶ προφάσει), e.g. Oth. 3, 2, per
causam legationis: Iul. 2, per causam exigendae pecuniae: Caes. B.G. vii 9,
per causam supplementi equitatusque cogendi.
publicum quadragesimae in Asia egit: the regular expression for
one who did this was "conductor publici quadragesimae portuum Asiae.”
The amount of the portoria or import duties varied in different places:
5 p.c. (vicesima) in Sicily, 2 p.c. (quinquagesima) in Spain, 2 p.c. (quadragesima) in Gaul and Asia. The portoria were farmed out to the publicani
(generally equites); see on Vitell. 14, 2. The farming of those in Asia
is mentioned in Cic. Att. i 17, 9, Ecce aliae deliciae equitum vix ferendae!
...
Asiam qui de censoribus conduxerunt questi sunt in senatu se cupiditate
prolapsos nimium magno conduxisse: ut induceretur. (“cancelled") locatio
postulaverunt. The word “publicum” was used like τὸ δημόσιον, τὸ κοινόν,
for the public revenue (vectigal), e.g. Hor. Ep. i 1, 77, conducere publica:
Plaut. Truc. 140, habere publicum "to be a farmer of the public revenue."
For the use of “agere" cf. C.I.L. vi 8591, Iucundus Aug. lib. actor xxxx
Gal. (i.e. quadragesimae Galliarum): Sen. Ep. 119, 5, circumspiciebam in
quod me mare negotiaturus immitterem, quod publicum agitarem, quas
arcesserem merces.
manebantque: a reading which is almost certainly corrupt. The
imperfect is explained by Ernesti as referring to the time when Vespasian
was emperor, which seems quite impossible. Baumg.-Cr. takes the meaning
to be that the statues were in existence for some time, and that Suet.
had found them mentioned in his authorities, but was unaware whether
they were still in existence in his own time; but, even if the text could
convey this meaning, there is the difficulty that Suet. could easily have
got definite information on the point. The future manebunt would be
much more intelligible; the provincials would be careful to preserve for
example's sake statues to that rarest of all officials, an honest publicanus.
Lipsius conjectured mantantque or monebantque; Casaubon manent hodieque, which is approved by Oudendorp.
Καλῶς τελωνήσαντι : the Greek words for the "tax-farmers" who
"bought" the taxes were τελῶναι, ὠνηταί, δημοσιῶναι, the terms for
the "selling" of taxes being πρᾶσις, πωλεῖν, ἐκδιδόναι (locare), and for the
“buying” ὠνή, ὠνεῖσθαι, πρίασθαι (conducere). In late Lat. we find telonium
(-eum) = τελώνιον “custom-house'' (Tertull. Idol. 12, Bapt. 12); telonarius
"collector of customs" occurs in Cod. Theodos. xi 28, 3, and another
form telonearius in Nonius (p. 35, Lindsay): Portitores dicuntur telonearii, qui portum obsidentes omnia sciscitantur, ut ex eo vectigal accipiant.
A fragmentary inscription at Rome, consisting of the same two words
with the addition of AN, inscribed upon the base of a statue believed to
be that of Sabinus, is mentioned by Casaubon and by Baumg.-Cr. who
explains AN as ἀνέστησαν οι ἀνέθηκαν, the name of those who erected the
statue having been lost. Dennison (Amer. Journ. Archaeol., 1898, p. 53)
notices this inscription as 'reported first by Boissard, Ant. Rom. i Tab. 51,
then by Montfaucon, Ant. Expl. iii 1, 10, Tab. 1, afterwards by Franz,
C.I.G. 5897, and recently by Kaibel, Inscr. Graec. Sicil. et Ital. 123*, who
regards it as spurious."
§ 3. faenus exercuit: the phrase "faenus exercere” is common in
post-Aug. writers for practising money-lending; e.g. Tac. A. vi 16, primo
xii tabulis sanctum ne quis unciario faenore amplius exerceret (sc. faenus):
Apul. Met. i 21, faenus copiosum sub arrabone auri et argenti crebriter
exercens: Dig. xxxiii 8, 26, si id faenus nomine filii exercuisset. Stein
(Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2610) takes our passage as meaning that Flavius
Sabinus discharged the same function in Gaul as in Asia and so was one
of the conductores (or mancipes) quadragesimae Galliarum.
Helvetios: a people of Gallia Lugdunensis dwelling in the mod.
Switzerland. Caesar (B.G. i 1 sq.) fixes their habitation between the Jura
mts. on the W., the Rhone and lake Lemannus (Geneva) on the S., and
the Rhine on the E. and N. Tacitus (Germ. 28) thinks it probable that
the Helvetii were once in Germany, and occupied the district between the
Hercynian Forest, the Rhine, and the Moenus (Main).
diem obiit: = mortuus est; cf. Tib. 4, 3, Gramm. 5: Plaut. Aul. 20,
etc.: Nep. Dion 10, 3: Plin. N.H. ii 248. Suet. also uses supremum diem
obire in Claud. 1, 3, and mortem obire in Aug. 4, 1: Tib. 39: Claud. 46.
Sabinus: Flavius Sabinus served with his brother Vespasian in Britain
under Aulus Plautius (43 A.D.) and was legatus of Moesia for 7 years.
Nero made him praefectus urbi, probably in 56, since he held the office for
12 years (Tac. H. iii 75, septem annis quibus Moesiam, duodecim quibus
praefecturam urbis obtinuit) though not without intermission, for in 61
Pedanius Secundus was praefectus urbi when murdered (Tac. A. xiv 42);
Borghesi thinks that Sabinus succeeded Pedanius and was praefectus for
only 7 years, and he would alter duodecim in Tac. H. iii 75 into totidem
or vii (see Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2611). Sabinus was removed from this office
by Galba, but was reinstated by Otho. When Vespasian's troops were
advancing on Rome, Vitellius offered to surrender the supreme power to
Sabinus pending the arrival of Vespasian; but Vitellius' soldiers besieged
Sabinus in the Capitol which was set on fire and Sabinus was captured
and killed (Vitell. 15: Tac. H. iii 64-75). Tacitus (c. 75) praises him
highly, mentioning as universally admitted that before the accession of
Vespasian the dignity of the family was centred in Sabinus: quod inter
omnes constiterit, ante principatum Vespasiani decus domus penes Sabinum
erat.
praefecturam urbis: Tacitus (A. vi 11) sketches the history of this
office. The praefectus urbi was appointed to control the city during the
temporary absence from Rome of the kings and, later, the consuls (ne urbs
sine imperio foret, in tempus deligebatur qui ius redderet ac subitis
mederetur). The creation of the praetor urbanus in 367 B.c. rendered the
praefectura urbis unnecessary, but a shadow (simulacrum) of it survived
in the annual appointment of a praefectus during the absence of the consuls
at the feriae Latinae. Augustus (Suet. Aug. 37) made the praefectura
urbis part of his new scheme of government; Maecenas discharged the
duties though without the title, and there were three other praefecti urbi
under Augustus. During the long absence of Tiberius for the last 11 years
of his reign the praefectus urbi became a permanent official of great and
ever increasing power. In later days the holder of the office not merely
possessed imperium, but exercised a jurisdiction from which there was no
appeal save to the Princeps himself. See Mommsen, Staatsr. i³ 661 sqq.,
ii³ 1059 sqq.
-, COS.
Polla: Bormann (Arch. Epig. Mitth. aus Öster. xv 1892, pp. 34-37)
refers to this Vespasia Polla an inscription (date 37-41 A.D.) at Spoletium
in Umbria, which, as supplemented by him, reads: C. Caesari Augusto
Germanico, | Germanici Caesaris f., Ti. Caesaris Aug. n., | divi Augusti
pron., pont. max., trib. pot.
| Vespasia f. Polla.
Newton (The Epigraph. Evidence for the Reigns of Vespasian and Titus,
p. 99) agrees that it most probably refers to our Vespasia Polla on the
grounds that Suet. says below that there were many memorials of the family
between Nursia and Spoletium; that the name Polla (from Paulla) is not a
common one; and that the mother of Vespasian would feel especial gratitude
to the emperor Gaius (Caligula) for his favours to her son (cf. Vesp. 2).
praefectum castrorum: the location of the troops in fixed quarters led to
the appointment of a new class of officers, the praefecti castrorum, who are
mentioned from the reign of Augustus to that of Septimius Severus (193-211
A.D.). They were chosen chiefly from centurions of long service, especially
primipili. Though a camp frequently contained several legions in the 1st
cent. A.D., there was generally only one praefectus castrorum; but when
Domitian ordained that each legion should have a separate camp (see
Dom. 7, 3), the “praefectus castrorum legionis (primae, etc.)” came in
time to be designated more briefly as “praefectus legionis," and finally,
under Gallienus (253-268 A.D.), supplanted the old senatorial "legatus
legionis." In peace time the praefectus castrorum was mainly concerned
with garrison duties, the distribution of military watches, etc. (cf. Tac.
Anm. i 20); in time of war he had to supervise the construction of camps,
the transport, the siege engines, the water supply, etc. (Veget. ii 10). See
Marquardt, op. cit. ii² 458.
Nursia: mod. Norcia, a Sabine town in the valley of the Nar at the
foot of the Apennines. It was the birthplace of Sertorius and in later
times of St. Benedict. Latin poets refer to the coldness of its climate;
e.g. Verg. Aen. vii 716, frigida Nursia: Sil. Ital. viii 416, habitata pruinis
Nursia. Suetonius (Aug. 12) describes how its inhabitants were punished
by Augustus for their republican sympathies and the aid which they gave
to L. Antonius in the Perusine war (41 в.с.).
Spoletium: mod. Spoleto, a town in Umbria between Interamna and
Trebia. A Roman colony was settled there in 240 в.с.
It became a
municipium by the Lex Iulia municipalis (45 в.с.).
The Via Flaminia
from Rome to Ariminum did not, up to Vespasian's time, pass through
Spoletium which lay to the right of it, but in later times the Itineraries
mention the road through Spoletium and Interamna as that usually taken.
There was always a branch road from the Via Flaminia to Spoletium, and
another branch road from Spoletium to Nursia. See Bunbury in Smith's
Dict. Geogr. ii 1032.
euntibus: this so-called “dativus absolutus," or dat. of reference,
denoting when (under what circumstances) a thing shows itself, is a
Graecism; cf. Galb. 4, 1, sinistrorsus Fundos petentibus: Varr. L.L. v 47,
sacrae viae pars quae est a Foro eunti primore clivo: Caes. B.C. iii 80,
oppidum primum Thessaliae venientibus ab Epiro: Liv. xxvi 26, sita
Anticyra est
laeva parte sinum Corinthiacum intranti. KühnerStegmann, i 321.
Vespasiae: this place does not seem to be mentioned elsewhere.
§ 4. non negaverim: for the subjunctive see on Oth. 12, 2 (“putem'').
mancipem operarum: Petro arranged for the supply of farm labourers
from Umbria and hired them out again at a profit to the Sabine farmers.
Heitland, who cites this passage in his Agricola (pp. 222, 327), does not
mention any other reference to migratory farm labour in Italy, nor does
Dorigny (Daremberg-Saglio, iv. 918) who inaccurately reproduces
Suetonius by saying: "On avait encore la ressource d'employer des
étrangers qui venaient, chaque année, faire la moisson dans les pays
fertiles. Le plus souvent, ces mercénaires étaient embauchés au delà du
Pô par un entrepreneur qui les conduisait dans l'Ombrie et le Latium et
y louait leurs services dans les grandes exploitations rurales."
=
subsedisse: cf. Vitell. 1, 3, quosdam ex Vitellis subsedisse Nuceriae.
curiose:
diligenter, accurate, attente; cf. Aug. 40, 4, cum curiose
cavisset: Calig. 16, 2, equites Romanos severe curioseque
recognovit:
Cic. Brut. 133, conquiram ista posthac curiosius. Lewis and Short (Lat.
Dict.) wrongly give this adv. the meaning of 'inquisitively, curiously” in
our passage, though it bears that meaning at times in other authors (e.g.
Cic. Brut. 231, ne vos curiosius eliceretis ex me quid de quoque iudicarem).
Suetonius uses the subst. curiosus in the sense of "eavesdropper, spy"
(Aug. 27, 3).
CHAPTER 2.
Falacrinae: this is most probably dat. sing. and not nom. pl.; see
note on "Becco,” Vitell. 18. The MSS. have Phalacrinae (or -ne).
Hülsen (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 1968) gives the name of the village as Falacrinae
(Falacrinis as abl. occurring in the Tab. Peut.). In the Itin. Ant. 366
Falacrino is the abl. from another form Falacrinum, and Cluver would
read Falacrino here. It was on the Via Salaria (see on Vesp. 12) in the
district of Reate near the mod. Civita Reale. Hülsen places it at the
village of Collicelli where there is still a church of S. Silvestro in Falacrino.
XV Kal. Decb.: Nov. 17.
Q. Sulpicio Camerino: Q. Sulpicius Q.f. Q.n. Camerinus was consul
ordinarius in 9 A.D. (Fast. Cap.: Plin. N.H. vii 158: Dio lvi arg. and c. 1).
He may possibly be identified with the epic poet mentioned in Ov. Pont. iv
16, 19, quique canit domitam Camerinus ab Hercule Troiam.
C. Poppaeo Sabino: C. Poppaeus Q. f. Q.n. Sabinus, who also was
consul ordinarius in 9 A.D., was the grandfather of Poppaea the wife of
Nero (Oth. 3, 1). He received triumphal honours in 26 A.D. for his victories
in Thrace. For 24 years he governed such important provinces as Moesia,
Achaia, and Macedonia "nullam ob eximiam artem, sed quod par negotiis
neque supra erat" (Tac. A. vi 39). He died in 35 A.D.
ante quam Augustus excederet: Augustus died on the 19th of Aug.,
14 A.D. (Suet. Aug. 100). For excederet see on c. 3.
Tertulla: wife of T. Flavius Petro Reatinus (c. 1, 2).
praediis Cosanis: Cosa (or Cosae, Aen. x 167) was a coast town of
Etruria with an important harbour, the Portus Cosanus. A Roman colony
was planted there in 273 в.с. Rutilius (Itin. i 285 sqq.) describes its
desolation in his time (c. 400 A.D.). Its interesting ruins bear the name
of Ansedonia. See Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria ii³ 245-262.
Other Cosana (praedia) are mentioned in Cic. Att. ix 6, xv 27. It has
been doubted whether the Cosa in our passage is Cosa in Etruria. Repetti
thinks that it is rather Cossa or Compsa a town of the Hirpini (see Dennis,
p. 262), and Hülsen (Pauly-Wissowa, iv 1667) says "Das (praedium)
Cosanum bei Cic. ad Att. xv 27, 1 kann mit Cosa zusammenhängen, schwerlich dagegen die praedia Cosana wo Vespasian erzogen wurde"; on the
other hand, Stein (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2627) says it is the Cosa in Etruria.
locum incunabulorum: cf. Cic. Att. ii 15, 3, Ego vero “in montes
patrios et ad incunabula nostra” pergam: Ov. M. viii 99, Iovis incunabula,
Creten: Justin xxxi 8, Romanos avitos lares et incunabula maiorum
inexplebile desiderium videndi tenebat.
ne quid oculorum consuetudini deperiret: there is a very similar
expression in Plin. Ep. iv 13, Interim ne quid festinationi meae pereat
("that my impatience may lose nothing," i.e. "to satisfy my impatience''),
quod sum praesens petiturus hac quasi praecursoria epistula rogo. For
"oculorum consuetudo” cf. Cic. N.D. ii 96, assiduitate cotidiana et consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi: Vel. Long. Orthogr. vii 69, 14, quicquid per consuetudinem aurium ita licuerit enuntiare.
sollemnibus ac festis diebus: Bremi explains these as family festivals,
birthdays, wedding days, etc., not public festivals.
pocillo: this dimin. of poculum occurs in Cato (R. R. 156 pocillum
fictile), Liv., Plin. N.H., etc. Suetonius uses a large number of diminutives;
see Appendix i. § 1. d. For the abl. with potare cf. Prop. i 14, 2, Lesbia
Mentoreo vina bibas opere (= ex opere "from cups chased by Mentor's
hand'').
perseveraverit: a favourite verb with Suet. who uses it 26 times,
either c. inf., or in aliqua re, or absolutely.
§ 2. sumpta virili toga: boys laid aside the toga praetexta and assumed
the toga virilis at the festival of the Liberalia on March 17. The normal
age for assuming it was between the completion of the 14th and the
completion of the 16th year (Marquardt, Privatl.2 123 sqq.); e.g. Augustus,
born on the 23rd of Sept. 63 B.c., assumed it in Oct. 48.
latum clavum: a broad purple stripe (or two stripes, see Marquardt,
op. cit. 547) woven into or stitched on to the tunica was distinctive of the
senatorial order, the equites being only entitled to wear the angustus clavus.
Augustus allowed the sons of senators to wear the tunica lati clavi on
assuming the toga virilis, and to attend meetings of the senate (Aug. 38, 2).
He also granted the right of wearing the latus clavus as a special favour
to some who were merely sons of equites, as a preliminary qualification
for entering the senate. An instance of this honour being bestowed on
the sons of equites is afforded by Ovid and his brother; cf. Trist. iv 10, 28,
liberior fratri sumpta mihique toga (i.e. the toga virilis) est: | induiturque
umeris cum lato purpura clavo. Those on whom the latus clavus was thus
conferred became eligible for the vigintivirate and the quaestorship.
quanquam: see on Tit. 7, 2.
fratre: Sabinus (c. 1, 3).
extudit: for this metaph. use of extundere (“to hammer out'') in the
sense of extorquere ab invito cf. Plaut. Most. 221, eundem animum oportet
nunc mihi esse gratum, ut impetravi, | atque olim, priusquam id extudi:
Val. Max. v 2, 13, perseveranti postulatione extuderunt ut, etc.: id. i 4, 4,
corvi duo in os eius adversum veluti iter impedientes advolaverunt: vixque
extuderunt ut domum rediret.
dum appellat: dum can be used not merely in a temporal but also
in a causal sense. Cicero has the perf. ind. with dum when so used; later
writers, especially Tacitus, prefer the present (Draeger, Hist. Synt. ii²
p. 607).
anteambulonem: the name for a slave who went before his master
in the streets to clear a way for him (cf. Plin. Ep. iii 14, 7); it was also
used contemptuously for the clients who went before the sella or lectica
of their patronus when he appeared in public; e.g. Mart. ii 18, 5, Sum
comes ipse tuus tumidique anteambulo regis (= patroni): id. iii 7, 3,
anteambulonis congiarium lassi: id. x 74, 3, anteambulones et togatulos
inter (cf. Juv. vii 143, x 44). See Marquardt, op. cit. 148.
§ 3. tribunus militum
meruit: all the better MSS. have tribunatum
for tribunus, and this is accepted by Roth, Ihm, and Preud'homme. The
reading tribunus (Torrentius) is rightly defended by Alexander (Textual
Criticisms on Suet. p. 8). No parallel is cited for tribunatum meruit in
the sense of "served as a tribune," and the usage of Suetonius seems
decisive; cf. Tit. 4, 1, tribunus militum et in Germania et in Britannia
meruit: vit. Horat. 1, bello Philippensi.. tribunus militum meruit: Tib. 9,
1, stipendia prima expeditione Cantabrica tribunus militum fecit. The
alternative explanation of tribunatum meruit, viz. that Vespasian earned
the post of tribunus militum by valour in Thrace, is contrary to what we
are told in Suet. Aug. 38, that those who received the latus clavus began
their career as military tribunes. Lipsius conjectured tribunatu meruit,
adopted by Casaubon and Ernesti.
Thracia: Vespasian served as military tribune in Thrace during the
reign of Tiberius when that country was in a very unsettled state, at
first through disputes between rival native kings who had been appointed
by Augustus (Tac. A. ii 64-67), and later through discontent at the rulers
established by Tiberius (A. iii 38). In 26 A.D. there was a revolt of the
highland tribes against the conscription which the Romans had introduced
into Thrace, but the rebels were forced to surrender by Poppaeus Sabinus
(see above), who was awarded triumphal distinctions (A. iv 46-51).
Cretam et Cyrenas: Cyrene (or Cyrenae) was the capital of the
district of Cyrenaica in N. Africa which was brought under Egyptian rule
by Ptolemy, son of Lagos, in 321 B.c. Apion, the bastard son of Ptolemy
Physcon, received Cyrenaica from his father as a special kingdom and
at his death bequeathed it by will to the Romans in 95 B.C. Rome at
first left the cities in Cyrenaica free, but was driven by their internal
quarrels to reduce Cyrenaica to a province (c. 75 в.с.), and it was united
with Crete on the subjugation of that island by Q. Metellus Creticus in
67 B.C. Augustus assigned the combined province (known as Creta-Cyrene,
Creta et Cyrene, or Creta simply) to the senate and it was put under a
propraetor who bore the title of proconsul.
provinciam sorte cepit: under the Empire no quaestors were sent to
imperial provinces (Gaius i 6), but the proconsular governor of each
senatorial province had one of the quaestors of the year allotted to him
with the title quaestor pro praetore; cf. Tac. Agr. 6, 2, sors quaesturae
provinciam Asiam dedit (Agricolae).
aedilitatis: for his unpleasant experience as aedile (in 38 A.D.) see
с. 5, 3.
illam: this correction of the meaningless etiam of the MSS. was made
by Torrentius, and the following hanc was restored by Bentley and Duker
for ac.
repulsa: the tech. term for defeat at an election. ferre repulsam
meant to be defeated"; renuntiari ‘‘to be returned."
sexto loco: i.e. he got in last. Julius Caesar added to the existing
four aediles two new ones called "Cereales" (qui frumento praeessent),
so that there were six in all; cf. Digest i 2, 32: Dio xliii 51. Marius
was returned last when he stood for the praetorship: Val. Max. vi 9, 14,
praeturae candidatus (Marius) supremo loco inhaesit.
in primis: to be distinguished from “primus,” as is shown by Cic.
Pis. 1, me cum quaestorem in primis, aedilem priorem (there were two
curule aediles), praetorem primum cunctis suffragiis populus Romanus
faciebat. Cf. Mur. 8, 18, where Cic. says: Neque enim vestrum quemquam
fugit, cum multi pares dignitate fiant, unus autem primum locum solus
possit obtinere, non eundem esse ordinem dignitatis et renuntiationis,
propterea quod renuntiatio gradus habet, dignitas autem est persaepe eadem
omnium.
praetor: in 39 A.D.
infensum senatui Gaium: the wrath of Caligula against the senate
is described in Suet. Calig. 48 sq.; he accused them of robbing him of
his well-earned triumph for his victory in Germany, and when they sent
envoys asking him to hasten his return to Rome, he roared out "I will
come and this (smiting his sword) will be with me"; he made proclamation.
that he was returning only to those who wished his presence, i.e. the equites
and the commons, for to the senate he would never more be fellow-citizen
or prince, and he forbade any senator to meet him. infensum (Lipsius)
is a necessary correction, as infensus of the MSS. can only be interpreted
unsatisfactorily of Vespasian's indignation against the senate for their
treatment of him when he stood for the aedileship, the election of magistrates having been transferred by Tiberius from the comitia to the senate.
ne quo non genere demereretur: see on Vitell. 2, 5, Claudium
ne qua non arte demereretur.
..
ludos extraordinarios: i.e. in addition to the ordinary games celebrated every year; see Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 482 sqq. In 22 B.C. Augustus
assigned to the praetors the charge of the games at Rome (Galb. 6, 1, n.),
though the quaestors occasionally gave gladiatorial shows (Dom. 4, 1).
pro victoria Germanica: in Sept. 39 A.D. Caligula undertook an
expedition, nominally against the Germans, of which little is known.
Ancient writers agree in deriding it, e.g. Tacitus, H. iv 15, Gaianarum
expeditionum ludibrium: Germ. 37, ingentes Gai Caesaris minae in
ludibrium versae; cf. Suet. Calig. 44–47, Dio lix 21 and 25. Merivale
(Rom. Hist. vi 80) suggests that Caligula's main object was to assert his
authority over Gaetulicus, the turbulent legatus of Upper Germany, who
was conspiring against him (see next note), and to cow the Rhine legions.
Furneaux (Tac. Ann., vol ii, Introd. p. 17) takes a similar view. Caligula
announced to the senate a great victory over the Germans (Pers. vi 43,
missa est a Caesare laurus | insignem ob cladem Germanae pubis, etc.).
He may have actually repulsed some band of Germans attempting to invade
Gaul (see Bury, Stud. Rom. Emp. c. xiv). He wintered at Lugdunum,
extorting money from the Gauls, and in the spring of 40 he assembled a
large force at Bononia (Boulogne) for the conquest of Britain; but having
reviewed the troops on the shore, he ordered them to pile arms and pick
shells which were sent to Rome as a sign of his great victory over the
ocean and its island.
coniuratorum: Aemilius Lepidus and Lentulus Gaetulicus. The latter
commanded the legions on the Upper Rhine for 10 years (see Galb. 6, 2),
and had already defied the emperor Tiberius to remove him when he was
charged with sapping the loyalty of the legions. He was implicated in the
plot of Aemilius Lepidus (an imperial favourite married to Drusilla sister
of Caligula) to slay Caligula and seize the throne. Agrippina and Julia,
sisters of Caligula, took part in this plot, which was discovered in 39 A.D.
Lepidus and Gaetulicus were executed, while Agrippina and Julia were
banished (Calig. 24: Claud. 9: Dio lix 22).
insepulti: loss of burial was part of the penalty paid by those condemned for treason (perduellio, maiestas), e.g. Tiberius Gracchus, Val.
Max. iv 7, hostis iudicatus, ultimo supplicio affectus, sepulturae honore
spoliatus. Cf. Ulpian (Digest lxviii 24): corpora eorum qui capite
damnantur cognatis ipsorum neganda non sunt, et id se observasse etiam
divus Augustus libro decimo de vita sua scribit; hodie autem eorum, in
quos animadvertitur, corpora non aliter sepeliuntur, quam si fuerit petitum
et permissum, et nonnunquam non permittitur, maxime maiestatis causa
damnatorum. Besides loss of burial their memory was for ever condemned
(damnata memoria) and their relatives were forbidden to wear mourning
(Digest iii 2, 11; xi 7, 35; xxxi 76, 9; Suet. Tib. 61, 2).
egit gratias: this returning of thanks to the emperor in the senate
is often mentioned; it was done either by an individual member for an
imperial favour bestowed (Oth. 2, 2), or by the senate collectively (e.g.
Iul. 16, 2: Tib. 53, 2: Ner. 7, 2; 10, 2: Tit. 11). Such an actio
gratiarum to the emperor was customary on the part of a consul entering
on office (e.g. Pliny's Panegyricus on Trajan).
amplissimum ordinem: amplissimus = senatorius, as in Calig. 49, 1:
Oth. 8, 1. So amplissimus magistratus = consulatus (Aug. 26, 2); amplissimi honores = magistratus curules (Iul. 72, Vitell. 5). Cicero has amplissimus ordo with reference to the senate twelve times in his speeches. In
Vesp. 9, 2 Suet. uses amplissimi ordines for senators and equites.
honore cenae: a coveted honour, according to the amusing story in
Calig. 39. The emperor Caligula found out that a wealthy provincial had
bribed those who issued the invitations (vocatores) with a sum of 200,000
sesterces, to be smuggled in as a guest at the imperial table. Caligula
was not in the least annoyed that the honour was rated so highly (nec
tulerat moleste tam magno aestimari honorem cenae suae), but next day
when he saw this man present at an auction of furniture which Caligula
was holding, he sent a messenger to hand him some trifle or other at the
price of 200,000 sesterces, and to say that he should dine that day with
Caesar on Caesar's own invitation (vocatu ipsius). Statius (Silv. iv 2)
writes in ecstatic terms of the honour of dining with Domitian; so too
Martial describes the divine" Domitian's banquets as ambrosiae dapes
(e.g. iv 8,8: viii 39, 2). Pliny (Ep. vi 31) highly appreciates the honour
of acting as Trajan's legal assessor and of dining with him when the
cases had been heard.
CHAPTER 3.
Flaviam Domitillam duxit uxorem: cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 1,
Titus matre liberta Domitilla nomine genitus: ib. 11, 1, Domitianus
Vespasiani et Domitillae libertae filius, germanus Titi. Mommsen (Staatsr.
ii³ 822, n. 1) shows that this Flavia Domitilla cannot have been deified,
since Statius (Silv. i 1, 97 sqq.), though mentioning Domitian's son,
brother, father, and sister as among the gods, makes no mention of his
mother. Thus inscriptions and coins on which diva Domitilla occurs are
to be referred to the daughter (see below) and not the mother. Stein
(Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2732) thinks that as the mother was not deified she
did not receive the title of Augusta, and so he refers C.I.L. vi 31287
(= Newton 229), in which Domitilla Augusta occurs, to the daughter. If
he is correct, the only inscription to Vespasian's wife is C.I.L. x 1419
(= Newton 228): Flaviae Domitillae [Imp.] Vespasian[i C]aesar[is] Aug.
Coins issued under Titus with the legend memoriae Domitillae may be in
honour of the mother (Stein, l.c.) or the daughter (Eckhel, vi 346).
equitis R.: there were numerous instances of provincials attaining
the rank of eques at Rome, e.g. Seneca's father who came from Corduba
in Spain; cf. Tac. A. xiv 53, where the younger Seneca says “Egone,
equestri et provinciali loco ortus, proceribus civitatis adnumerer?" So
too Columella was probably an eques from Cadiz. For the cosmopolitan
character of the Roman knighthood see Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 146.
Caligula included in it the eminent men of every province; cf. Vesp. 9, 2.
Sabratensis: Sabrata (Σάβρατα or Σάβραθα Ptol., Σαβαραθά Procop.)
is mentioned as a Phoenician foundation in Africa; Sil. Ital. iii 256,
Sabratha tum Tyrium vulgus Sarranaque Leptis, | Oeaque Trinacrios Afris
permixta colonos, | et Tingin rapido mittebat ab aequore Lixus. It lay
to the W. of Oea (mod. Tripoli), and these two towns together with Leptis
Magna made up the Tripolis Africana or Regio Tripolitana. Afterwards
Sabrata became a Roman colony (Itin. Anton. p. 61), and is the mod.
Sabart or Tripoli Vecchio.
delicatam: = delicias, concubinam, amicam; cf. “delicatus,” Tit. 7, 2.
Latinae condicionis: the status of half-emancipated libertini. Those
manumitted by any of the three statutory methods, vindicta, censu, testamento, became cives Romani. There were also informal modes of manumission, e.g. per epistolam (the master writing to the slave that he was
free); inter amicos (a statement of the master in the presence of his
friends that the slave was free); adhibitione cenae (the master inviting
the slave to dine). These informally manumitted slaves, though their
freedom was secured to them, were still slàves in the eyes of the law,
any property they acquired belonging legally to their masters. The Lex
Iunia Norbana (19 A.D. ?) gave them legal status: they were made freemen with the rights of Latin colonists (Latini coloniarii) i.e. commercium
without conubium, with the important restriction that they could not make
a will or take under a will. Such freedmen were called Latini Iuniani as
distinct from the older Latins. Gaius (i 28, where see Poste) mentions
many ways by which Latini Iuniani might become cives, e.g. re-manumission (iteratio) in one of the statutory modes, serving six years in the
Roman guards, imperial grant (beneficium imperiale), begetting three
children (ius trium liberorum). Justinian (Cod. vii 7) abolished the status
of Latinitas altogether. Cf. Roby, Roman Private Law i 28 sqq.
mox: see on Oth. 10, 1.
reciperatorio iudicio: reciperatores (recup-) “recoverers” were first
appointed to adjudicate on the recovery of property between Rome and
foreign states, and in private suits between cives Romani and peregrini.
They were generally 3 or 5 in number, chosen by the praetor, and some
might be peregrini, whereas only a civis could be a iudex proper. We find
reciperatores acting in cases of many kinds, e.g. cases of debt (Plaut.
Bacch. 270), cases of extortion (Tac. A. i 74), fiscal cases (Suet. Ner. 17),
and cases of disputed legal status as ingenuus, libertus, servus (Plaut.
Rud. 1282: Suet. Dom. 8, 1: Cic. Flacc. 17, 40, Atque huic eidem nuper
tres equites Romani (acting as reciperatores) honesti et graves, cum in
causa liberali eum, qui adserebatur, cognatum suum esse diceret, non
crediderunt). Roby, ii 316 sqq.
patre asserente: in cases affecting freedom (causae liberales) the
persons whose status was involved could not conduct the claim themselves,
as their status was undetermined, but must act through a representative
called an assertor (in libertatem). The claim for freedom could be maintained, even though the person affected was unwilling, by father, son, or
kinsmen, or, failing them, by mother, daughter, or kinswomen (Digest xl
12); cf. Suet. Gramm. 21, quamquam asserente matre permansit tamen in
statu servitutis. The phrase "asserere manu aliquem in libertatem (or
liberali causa)" meant to lay one's hand on the person whose claim to
freedom was maintained"; the opposite phrase occurs in Tib. 2, 2, virginem
ingenuam in servitutem asserere.
Cf. Dom. 8, 1: Vitell. 10, 2.
Ferenti: see on Oth. 1, 1.
nec quicquam amplius quam:
modo; see on “nihil aliud quam,” Dom. 21.
=
= et nihil amplius quam et tantumquaestorio scriba: the scribae quaestorii formed an important collegium,
divided into 3 decuriae, and controlled by the sex primi and a princeps
(Cic. N.D. iii 30, 74: C.I.L. vi 1805: Plut. Cat. min. 16); they were
probably 27 in number before Sulla's time and 36 later. They dealt with
the business of the aerarium and public accounts, and also with the
various state records kept in the aerarium. Two were attached to each
provincial governor (cf. Dom. 9, 3). Some were liberti, but the majority
ingenui. They claimed to belong to the ordo equester, and are included
in it by Cicero (de domo 28, 73), though at other times, when it suits his
purpose, Cicero speaks of this rank of theirs with contempt (Verr. iii 60,
137; 79, 184). In the suite of provincial governors they came after the
staff officers of equestrian rank. We read of scribae who afterwards became quaestors, curule aediles, and praetors. The slighting manner in which
Suet. speaks of them here is due to the fact that they were mercenarii,
and so were looked down upon in comparison with officials and magistrates
who were not paid; cf. Nep. Eum. 1, quod (i.e. the position of scriba,
γραμματεύς) multo apud Graios honorificentius est quam apud Romanos:
namque apud nos re vera, sic ut sunt, mercenarii scribae existimantur.
See Mommsen, Staatsr. i 346 sqq. The poet Horace, after serving as
tribune in the Republican army, bought a position as scriba quaestorius
(Suet. vit. Horat.).
ex hac liberos tulit: Suetonius is very fond of the phrase "ferre liberos
ex (once de, Vitell. 6) uxore," which is used of the father in the same
sense as "tollere liberos" (see on Tit. 4, 2) or “suscipere liberos"; cf.
Aug. 4, 1, quos ex Atia tulerat Augustus: Aug. 63, 1: Calig. 7: Claud. 1,
6; 27, 1: Ner. 35, 3: Oth. 1, 3 (bis): Dom. 3, 1. He uses ferre without
ex uxore in Tib. 47, qui quattuor liberos tulerat; this occurs earlier in
Sen. Herc. O. 1604, quem (Philocteten) tulit Poeas, and Statius has a
similar expression, Silv. i 2, 72, quem
Nobilitas gavisa tulit
("Nobilitas” being personified as a father; see Vollmer). Titus was
born on Dec. 30, 39 A.D., Domitian on Oct. 24, 51 A.D.
Domitillam: this Flavia Domitilla is referred to (without being
named) as sister of the emperor Domitian in Quintil. Inst. Orat. iv
prooem. 2, and in Stat. Silv. i 1, 98; in the latter passage she is mentioned
as one of the deified members of Domitian's family. See the note above
on her mother Flavia Domitilla. The name of the husband of this daughter
of Vespasian is unknown; she had a daughter, also called Flavia Domitilla,
who became the wife of Flavius Clemens (see Dom. 15, 1; 17, 1).
adhuc privatus: i.e. before July 1, 69 A.D.
=
excessum: mortem; cf. Tib. 22; 70, 3: Calig. 1, 1; 9; 48, 1:
Ner. 5, 2. The mysterious passing of Romulus is called excessus by
Cicero: Legg. i 1, 3 Romulus post excessum suum; Rep. ii 30, post obitum,
vel potius excessum, Romuli. Elsewhere in Cic. either excessus e vita
(opp. to in vita mansio, Fin. iii 18, 60) or excessus vitae (Tusc. i 12, 27).
The use of excedere by itself in the sense of mori is unclassical (Cic. has
2 c
excedere vita or e vita); it is first found in Tac. and occurs with especial
frequency in Suet. See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 487.
Caenidem: described in a titulus sepulcralis or sepulchral inscription
(C.I.L. vi 12037, Newton 237) as Antonia Aug(ustae) l(iberta) Caenis;
there is another inscription (C.I.L. vi 18358, Newton 238) to Flavia Helpis
Caenidiana, a slave of Vespasian and attendant on Caenis, who on manumission took the gentile name of Vespasian and a cognomen formed from
the cognomen of Antonia Caenis. Dio (lxvi 14) praises Caenis for her
fidelity and the excellence of her memory, and tells how once her mistress
Antonia gave her a letter about Sejanus to bear to Tiberius and charged
her to see that it was at once destroyed so as to leave no trace: whereupon Caenis replied that such a charge was useless as her retentive memory
would preserve the contents of the letter for ever. As concubine of
Vespasian she had great influence and acquired vast wealth, for all who
wished to get posts from the emperor would load her with presents; this
being done, as rumour said, with the connivance of the penurious Vespasian
(see on Vesp. 16). Domitian, however, treated her with contempt (see
Dom. 12, 3). She died before 75 A.D., and Vespasian kept many concubines
in her place (Vesp. 21).
Antoniae: this younger daughter of Marcus Antonius, the triumvir,
was born in 36 B.c. and married Drusus, brother of the emperor Tiberius,
to whom she bore (1) Germanicus, the father of the emperor Caligula:
(2) the emperor Claudius: (3) a daughter named Livilla.
a manu: = amanuensis, which is used in Tit. 3, 2, where see note.
contubernium: here = concubinatus. It was primarily used of soldiers
sharing the same tent (tabernaculum), and was then extended to intimacies
of any kind, often illicit ones. We see the transition in Cic. Verr. vi 104,
ubi illud contubernium muliebris militiae in illo delicatissimo litore?
iustae uxoris: cf. Calig. 24, 1, Drusillam
in modum iustae uxoris
propalam habuit; so iustum matrimonium, e.g. Ner. 28, 1, Acten libertam
paulum afuit quin iusto matrimonio sibi coniungeret. Latin jurists use
the phrases iustum matrimonium and iustae nuptiae for legal wedlock which
required conubium, pubertas, consensus (Roby, op. cit. i 128 sqq.).
•
CHAPTER 4.
Claudio principe missus est: cf. Eutrop. vii 19, 1, ut qui a Claudio
in Germaniam et deinde in Britanniam missus tricies et bis cum hoste
conflixerit, duas validissimas gentes, viginti oppida, insulam Vectam
Britanniae proximam imperio Romano adiecerit. Hübner (Hermes xvi,
p. 528, n. 5) notices the inscriptional style of the words of Suetonius in
the opening sentences of this chapter, “Worte denen wohl der Text einer
Triumphalinschrift zu Grunde liegt."
Narcissi gratia: Narcissus was a notorious freedman and secretary
(ab epistulis) of Claudius. He and another freedman Pallas, the treasurer
(a rationibus), made themselves all-powerful in the emperor's palace
(Claud. 28, Tit. 2; Dio lx 17), and both accumulated enormous fortunes
(cf. Juv. xiv 329). Narcissus insisted on the execution of Messalina, wife
of Claudius (see on Vitell. 2, 5). He opposed Agrippina, the new empress,
and supported the claim of Britannicus (son of Messalina) against that
of Nero (son of Agrippina) to be designated as successor to Claudius.
Shortly after Nero's accession (54 A.D.) he was driven to suicide. Dio (lx 19)
says that when the soldiers of Plautius were unwilling to embark in Gaul
for Britain, Narcissus was sent from Rome and mounting the tribunal of
Plautius tried to address the mutineers, who howled the ex-slave down with
cries of Io Saturnalia!, but nevertheless they suddenly became submissive
to the orders of their commander. Furneaux (Tac. Ann. Vol. ii Introd.
c. 5) suggests that the prominence of Narcissus in the story of the despatch
of the expedition points to the cupidity of freedmen and other courtiers
as a great prompting motive of the undertaking.
legatus legionis: Augustus perpetuated the custom introduced by the
dictator Caesar of placing the whole legion under the command of a
legatus. These legati legionum (or legati Augusti legionum) were
always senators either of praetorian rank or qualified to attain such
rank (Tac. A. ii 36). Vespasian was given command of the 2nd legion at
Argentoratum (Strassburg) after his praetorship; cf. Tac. H. iii 44,
Britanniae inclinatus erga Vespasianum favor, quod illic secundae legioni
a Claudio praepositus et bello clarus egerat: id. Agr. 13, divus Claudius
auctor iterati operis (i.e. the conquest of Britain) transvectis legionibus et
adsumpto in partem rerum Vespasiano, quod initium venturae mox fortunae
fuit: domitae gentes, capti reges et monstratus fatis Vespasianus. The
four legions sent under Plautius against Britain were the 2nd (Augusta)
and 14th (Gemina Martia) from Upper Germany: the 20th (Valeria Victrix)
from Lower Germany: the 9th (Hispana) from Pannonia.
tricies conflixit: Eutropius (vii 19, 1) says tricies et bis.
Nothing
definite is known with regard to these engagements. Dio (lx 20) mentions
Vespasian and his brother Sabinus as effecting the crossing of an unspecified river (most probably the Medway) and slaughtering many of
the foe. Thence the Britons retired across the Thames. This was before
the arrival of Claudius (see below). In the last three years of Plautius'
command (44-47) Vespasian and the 2nd legion seem to have subjugated
Hampshire and as far as Exeter and South Wales. See Furneaux (l.c.)
and Haverfield in Furneaux-Anderson, Tac. Agr. Introd. xliii sqq. Josephus
(Bell. Iud. iii 1) eulogizes Vespasian for having pacified the West by
subduing the Germans, and for having won Britain by force of arms,
thus affording Claudius a triumph without any sweat of his own (χωρὶς
ἱδρῶτος ἰδίου).
duas validissimas gentes: these have been identified with the Belgae
and Atrebates. The chief towns of the Belgae were Ischalis (Ilchester),
Aquae Sulis (Bath), and Venta Belgarum (Winchester); the capital of
the Atrebates was Calleva (Silchester).
Vectem: Vectis or Vecta (Οὐηκτίς) is the Isle of Wight, opposite to
Portus Magnus (Portsmouth).
Auli Plauti: Aulus Plautius Silvanus was an experienced officer
brought from Pannonia to act as commander-in-chief in Britain (43-47 A.D.).
He had been one of the consules suffecti in 29 A.D. Dio (lx 19) describes
him as βουλευτὴς (senator) λογιμώτατος. He was rewarded for his achievements in Britain with an ovatio, an honour which, like the triumphus, was
reserved for members of the imperial family, and the emperor Claudius
2c2
walked by his left side to and from the Capitol (Suet. Claud. 24, Dio lx 30,
Tac. A. xiii 32)..
legati consularis: Plautius was the first governor of the province of
Britain; cf. Tac. Agr. 14, consularium primus Aulus Plautius praepositus
ac subinde Ostorius Scapula (47-52 A.D.), uterque bello egregius: redactaque paulatim in formam provinciae proxima pars Britanniae. In the
imperial provinces (provinciae Caesaris) the emperor was himself proconsul
but governed through legati Augusti pro praetore, who as a rule were
chosen by him from those who had been consuls or praetors; hence they
are spoken of as legati consulares or praetorii.
Claudi ipsius ductu: Plautius landed in Kent with 40,000 men, and
made his way in spite of the vigorous resistance of the Britons to the
south bank of the Thames at a point where it could be crossed, near
London. He then sent for the emperor himself to assume the supreme
command. Dio (lx 21) says that Claudius was only 16 days in Britain.
He left Rome in July, 43 A.D., joined the waiting army on the Thames,
at once crossed with it, conquered in a pitched battle, took Camulodunum
(Colchester) the capital of the native prince Cunobelinus (Cymbeline) and
subdued or received the surrender of many of the enemy. Having
repeatedly accepted the salutation of imperator from the troops, he gave
over command to Plautius and returned to Rome where he celebrated a
magnificent triumph. Suetonius (Claud. 17) says that it was the desire
to win the full honours of a triumph (iusti triumphi decus) that led him
in the first instance to plan the conquest of Britain.
§ 2. triumphalia ornamenta: these included the right to be styled
“triumphalis," to wear the toga picta, tunica palmata, and aurea corona,
and to carry an ivory sceptre (scipio eburnus); the honour of a statua
triumphalis or laureata was usually added (cf. Tac. Agr. 40). From 14 в.с.
triumphs were reserved for the imperial family, and successful legati
received merely the ornamenta (or insignia). In Aug. 38 Suetonius says
that Augustus granted these ornamenta more than 30 times, and in Tib. 9
he says that according to some they were first given by him to Tiberius
(in 12 B.с.). Tiberius as emperor degraded the distinction by giving it to
unworthy people (Dio lviii 14); so too Claudius, who conferred the
ornamenta e.g. on senators who accompanied him on his expedition to
Britain (Dio lx 23). Suetonius (Claud. 24) mentions a joint petition from
the legions to Claudius asking that these ornamenta should be bestowed
ex officio on all legati consulares, to prevent them seeking pretexts for
war. Nero gave them even to quaestors and equites and for other than
military services (Ner. 15). From Trajan's time all consuls had the right
to use them on official occasions and the distinction lost all value. See
Mommsen, Staatsr. is 465; Daremberg-Saglio, v 491.
duplex sacerdotium: from the evidence of coins Eckhel (vi 331)
concludes that these priesthoods were the augurship and chief pontificate.
Cf. Galb. 8, 1, Vitell. 5 for similar honours.
..
consulatum menses: he was consul suffectus in Nov.-Dec. 51 A.D.;
see Dom. 1, 1.
proconsulatum: he became proconsul of Africa; see below (§ 3).
in otio secessuque egit: cf. Galb. 8, 1, ex eo tempore prope ad medium
Neronis principatum in secessu plurimum vixit. Another secessus of
Vespasian is mentioned below (§ 4).
Agrippinam: a daughter of Germanicus (see on Vitell. 2, 3). In spite
of the intrigues of Narcissus on behalf of Aelia Paetina, she was made
the wife of her uncle the emperor Claudius in 49, after the death of
Messalina. Nero was her son by an earlier husband Domitius Ahenobarbus.
With the aid of Locusta she poisoned Claudius in 54. On the accession
of Nero she was responsible for the death of her enemy Narcissus among
others. The young Nero tried to shake off the ascendancy of his arrogant
mother, and when she threatened to replace him as emperor by Britannicus
(son of Messalina), he had Britannicus poisoned. Her opposition to Nero's
amours with a freedwoman Acte and later with Poppaea (wife of Otho)
led to her death. After an unsuccessful attempt to drown her, she was
stabbed to death by Nero's agents in 59 (cf. Oth. 3, 1: Tac. 4. xiv 8).
potentem: this potentia of Agrippina is mentioned by Tacitus; e.g.
A. xiii 12, infracta paulatim potentia matris delapso Nerone in amorem
libertae: xiv 1, cupientibus omnibus infringi potentiam matris.
defuncti Narcissi: the forced suicide of Narcissus in 54 A.D. is
mentioned in Tac. A. xiii 1, nec minus properato Narcissus Claudii libertus,
de cuius iurgiis adversus Agrippinam rettuli, aspera custodia et necessitate
extrema ad mortem adigitur, invito principe (i.e. Nero), cuius abditis adhuc
vitiis per avaritiam ac prodigentiam mire congruebat.
quoque: = etiam; see on Vitell. 7, 3.
amicos perosam: the better MSS. have amici (retained by Roth,
Preud 'homme, and Ihm); amicos is read by all the earlier editors and is
supported by Madvig (Adv. ii 570). Modderman proposed amicitiam periculosam. The difficulty in amici (= any friend of Narcissus) is the use of
the gen. with perosam, for until a very late period this verb always takes
the acc. (used, e.g., by Augustus ap. Suet. Tib. 21, 7), the gen. occurring
only in Prudent. Peristeph. iii 41, perosa quietis (Boethius, Cons. Phil. ii 4,
has vitae huius exosa), where the participle is used adjectivally. It would
be easy to read amicum (amicū being corrupted to amici through assimilation
to defuncti and Narcissi). Alexander, who defends amici, explains the
passage as meaning "fearing Agrippina, who still held dominant influence
over her son and hated as well the dead Narcissus, his (Vespasian's)
friend'; for the adjectival use of perosam (“full of hatred against'")
he compares exosa (“contemptuous of'") in Boeth. and veritus ("regardful of'") in Cic. Att. viii 4, 1, ne tui quidem testimonii veritus.
..
§ 3. sortitus Africam: the date of his proconsulship is uncertain, but
it was after the death of Agrippina in 59. Borghesi says it was before
62 (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2629); Bury assigns it to 63. For sortitus see on
Galb. 7, 1, Africam optinuit extra sortem.
integerrime administravit: this conflicts with what Tacitus says,
H. ii 97: integrum illic (i.e. in Africa) ac favorabilem ("popular'') proconsulatum Vitellius, famosum invisumque Vespasianus egerat. Suetonius
agrees with Tac. about Vitellius (Vitell. 5, in provincia singularem innocentiam praestitit). Which is the true account of Vespasian's governorship is uncertain, but at the time of his accession he was very unpopular
in Africa; cf. Tac. H. iv 49, nec ambigitur provinciam (i.e. Africa) et
militem alienato erga Vespasianum animo fuisse. Silius Italicus (iii 599)
eulogizes Vespasian: compescet ripis Rhenum, reget impiger Afros, |
palmiferamque senex bello domitabit Idumen.
nisi quod: see on Vitell. 7, 1.
Hadrumeti: on the E. coast of Tunis. Sallust (Iug. 19) mentions it
as a Phoenician colony older than Carthage.
It sided with Rome in the
third Punic war, and on the destruction of Carthage it was guaranteed
its independence as a populus liber. It also figures in the civil war on
the side of Pompey against Caesar (Bell. Afr. 3, 62, 97). Trajan made
it a Roman colony, its official title in inscriptions being "col. Concordia
Ulpia Traiana Augusta Frugifera Hadrumetina.”” Destroyed by the
Vandals it was restored by Justinian as Justinianopolis. Its ruins are at
the mod. Susa.
rapa in eum iacta sunt: even the emperors were exposed to such
manifestations of popular indignation; e.g. Claudius was pelted with
bits of bread in the Forum on account of a scarcity of grain (Claud. 18, 2),
and for the same reason Antoninus Pius was pelted with stones (Aur. Vict.
Epit. 15).
rediit nihilo opulentior: he must have refrained from the plundering
which so often led to accusations for extortion (res repetundae) against
provincial governors; cf. Oth. 2, 2.
labefactata fide: in other authors labefactare fidem means "to sap or
undermine the loyalty of"; e.g. Tac. A. xiii 21, provinciarum fidem labefactatam: Cic. Cluent. 68, 194: Liv. xxiv 20, 15.
Suetonius uses labefacto
only here; in Ner. 38, 1 and Calig. 57, 1 he has labefño of structures
collapsing or being demolished.
fratri: i.e. Flavius Sabinus (see c. 1, 3). The mortgage led to illwill between the brothers according to Tac. H. iii 65: namque Flavius
Sabinus aetate prior privatis utriusque rebus auctoritate pecuniaque
Vespasianum anteibat et credebatur adfectam eius fidem praeiuvisse (parce
iuvisse, Heraeus) domo agrisque pignori acceptis; unde, quamquam manente
in speciem concordia, offensarum operta metuebantur.
obligaret: cf. Claud. 9, 2, cum obligatam aerario fidem liberare non
posset: Plaut. Truc. 214, fundi et aedes obligatae sunt: Cic. Agr. iii 2, 9,
obligata praedia; so with pignori (as in opponere pignori “to mortgage''),
Digest xxxix 2, 44, aedes pignori obligare.
mangonicos quaestus: mango (from which comes Eng. "monger'')
was used for a dealer who employed every artifice and attraction to get
rid of his wares; cf. Gr. μάγγανον "a charm,” μαγγανεύω. It was
specially used of slave-dealers (e.g. Suet. Aug. 69, 1: Dom. 7, 1), but
Pliny (N.H.) has it of dealers in wine, precious stones, perfumes, and
drugs. Apparently Vespasian traded in mules, and Marcilius cites glosses
of Philoxenus (ἱπποβοσκός· mango and κυνοτρόφος· mango) to show that mango
could be used of a vendor of animals. Weynand (in Pauly-Wissowa, vi
2629) and Heitland (Agricola 327) prefer to regard Vespasian as a slavedealer.
descenderit: for the perf. subjunct. coupled with the imperf.
(obligaret) see on Galb. 3, 1. When he became emperor, Vesp. still
stooped to trading (c. 16, 1), though even senators were legally debarred
from it (Friedl. Sitteng. i10 130). Pertinax, when consularis, carried on a
business in Liguria through the agency of his slaves (Capit. Pert. c. 3).
mulio vocabatur: “propter mangonicos quaestus e mulis Reatinis, qui
tum maxime in usu et pretio. Vespasiani autem praedia in agro Reatino"
(Casaubon). Reate (c. 1, 2), like Arcadia, was famous for its asses, some
of which fetched 60,000 or 100,000 sesterces; they were used especially
for the breeding of mules (Varr. R.R. ii 1, 14; Plin. N.H. viii 167).
Ernesti and Bremi think that Vespasian hired out mules for transport
purposes. Lipsius explains mulio as meaning, not that Vesp. was a vendor
of mules, but that he was an itinerant merchant always on the road like
a muleteer; in support of this he quotes Seneca (Apoc. 6) who describes
Hercules as having tramped more lands “quam ullus mulio perpetuarius.”
The nickname of ‘‘mulio” was earlier given to Ventidius Bassus by Plancus
(Cic. Fam. x 18) and by Cicero (Plin. N.H. vii 135). Bassus, who celebrated a triumph in 38 B.C. for his victory over the Parthians, made a
livelihood in his youth by supplying mules; cf. Gell. N.A. xv 4, сит
adolevisset, victum sibi aegre quaesisse, eumque sordide invenisse comparandis mulis et vehiculis quae magistratibus, qui sortiti provincias forent,
praebenda publice conduxisset; in isto quaestu notum esse coepisse C.
Caesari, etc.
latum clavum: see on c. 2, 2. Vespasian had used his influence with
Nero to obtain the honour for this youth. Such unprincipled conduct
brought him into disrepute in his earlier years; cf. Auson. Caes. x, olim
qui dubiam privato in tempore famam, | rarum aliis, princeps transtulit
in melius.
impetrarat: see Kühner-Stegmann ii 544 sqq., where many examples
are given, from early Latin and from Sall., Liv., and later writers, of the
indic. in subordinate clauses in Oratio Obliqua. It is common in Suetonius;
e.g.. Tib. 44, 2, fertur utrique mox, quod mutuo flagitium exprobrarant,
crura fregisse: Iul. 9, 2, referens Caesarem in consulatu confirmasse
regnum, de quo aedilis cogitarat: Iul. 30, 2, Pompeius dictitabat, quod
neque consummare, quae instituerat, neque populi expectationem, quam
fecerat, explere posset, turbare omnia voluisse (Caesarem).
eo nomine: = eâ causâ; cf. Galb. 16, 1, eo nomine omnes exacerbavit :
Ner. 30, 1, laudabat Gaium nullo magis nomine, quam quod, etc.
“nomen”
properly meant the heading under which an item was entered in an account;
cf. Vesp. 8, 3, calciarii nomine: Iul. 25, 1, stipendii nomine. The extended
use of the word is frequent in Cicero; e.g. Lael. 25, multis nominibus
("under many heads," "on many accounts'') est hoc vitium notandum.
§ 4. peregrinatione Achaica: Suetonius (Ner. 22 sq.) says that all the
Greek cities which held musici agones had adopted the rule of sending to
Nero the citharoedorum coronae, and Nero welcomed their messengers and
told them that the Greeks were the only people with an ear for music
and that they alone were worthy of hearing his musical efforts. In Sept.
66 A.D. he visited Greece, singing publicly at all the contests. No matter
at what date the historic festivals were due, they were all crowded into
the space of one year, and a musical competition was introduced even at
the Olympic games. Early in 68 he returned to Rome in triumph with the
roll of his victories carried before him, wearing his Olympic crown and
bearing in his hand the crown won at the Pythian festival. His crowns,
which numbered 1808, were hung by him on an obelisk in the Circus
Maximus. Cf. Tac. A. xv 33; Philostrat. vit. Apoll. iv 24, 36; Dio lxiii 8,
21; Juv. viii 224, haec opera atque hae sunt generosi principis artes |
gaudentis foedo peregrina ad pulpita cantu | prostitui Graiaeque apium
meruisse coronae.
comites: cf. Galb. 15, 2: Vitell. 11, 1. The comites Augusti or companions of the emperor on a journey or campaign were selected from his
amici (see on “cohors amicorum,'' Galb. 7, 1) and were either senators or
less frequently knights. They were paid for their services.
Suetonius
(Tib. 46) mentions as a proof that Tiberius was “pecuniae parcus ac
tenax" the fact that he never allowed a salarium but only cibaria (i.e. their
keep) to his comites. They discharged various duties, administrative,
judicial, or military, assigned to them by the emperor. See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii 835, Hermes iv 120.
cum cantante eo discederet: a heinous offence in Nero's eyes; cf.
Ner. 23 (when Nero was in Greece), cantante eo ne necessaria quidem causa
excedere theatro licitum est. Itaque et enixae quaedam in spectaculis
dicuntur et multi taedio audiendi laudandique clausis oppidorum (i.e.
entrances to the theatre) portis aut furtim desiluisse de muro aut morte
simulata funere elati. In Tac. A. xvi 5 there is a vivid account of the
discomforts endured by the audience compelled to remain in their places
as long as Nero figured on the stage during the quinquennial games at
Rome in 65 A.D.
aut praesens obdormisceret: Suetonius is here describing Vespasian's
behaviour when he was with Nero in Greece in the latter part of 66;
Tacitus (l.c.) mentions a similar indiscretion on Vespasian's part when he
was one of Nero's audience at Rome in 65: ferebantque Vespasianum,
tamquam somno coniveret, a Phoebo liberto increpitum aegreque meliorum
precibus obtectum, mox imminentem perniciem maiore fato effugisse.
Weynand (in Pauly-Wissowa vi 2629) thinks that Suetonius and Tacitus,
though differing as to the time and place, must be referring to one and
the same occurrence, on the ground that Vesp. would hardly have imperilled
his life a second time by repeating his offence. Furneaux (on Tac. l.c.)
argues that the interval which Suet. mentions between the banishment of
Vesp. from court and his appointment to Judaea supports the date given
by Tac. for the offence rather than that given by Suet. himself. But if
we assume that the account in Tac. is the correct one, then the influence
of Vespasian's friends must not merely have saved his life but also led
to his being included among the comites of Nero on his tour in Greece.
Dio (lxvi 11, quoted on c. 14) agrees with Suet. that it was in Greece that
Vesp. was banished from Nero's presence; so too Josephus (Bell. Iud. iii 1)
says that it was while Vesp. was with Nero in Greece that he was given
command in Judaea, and adds that Nero mollified Vesp. with flattering
words, which implies a previous estrangement.
prohibitus: for the summary method in which he was excluded from
court see c. 14. Such a sign of disfavour might be regarded as a deathwarrant; cf. Tac. A. xv 23, when the senate rush out to Antium to congratulate Nero on a daughter borne by Poppaea, and Thrasea is forbidden
to present himself with them: Thraseam prohibitum inmoto animo praenuntiam inminentis caedis contumeliam excepisse.
contubernio:
=
comitatu. The word contubernium (see on c. 3) is
often used of the intimacy which the emperor allowed to those who were
admitted to his immediate circle; e.g. Tib. 14, 4, quem ut sapientiae professorem contubernio admoverat: ib. 56, Seleucum grammaticum
primum a contubernio removit.
publica salutatione: at Rome the early morning salutationes or
receptions by the emperor were attended daily by his amici (see on c. 14
and Galb. 7, 1); a public reception (publica or promiscua salutatio),
crowded by those of every standing, was usually held on festival days
such as the anniversary of the emperor's accession and the Kalends of
January. A full account of imperial salutationes is given by Friedlaender,
Sitteng. i10 90 sqq.
=
extrema:
extremum supplicium, mortem; cf. Calig. 54, 2, extrema
metuentes: Tac. A. v 5, non quidem extrema decernerent: Plat. Pol. 297 E,
πᾶσι τοῖς ἐσχάτοις ζημιοῦσθαι.
provincia
oblata est: Vesp. was appointed to Judaea at the end
of 66 or very early in 67.
§ 5. percrebruerat Oriente
opinio: so Tacitus, H. v 13, describing
prodigies and prophecies preceding the siege of Jerusalem: apertae repente
delubri fores et audita maior humana vox excedere divos; simul ingens
motus excedentium. Quae pauci in metum trahebant: pluribus persuasio
inerat antiquis sacerdotum litteris contineri, eo ipso tempore fore ut valesceret Oriens profectique Iudaea rerum potirentur. Quae ambages
Vespasianum ac Titum praedixerat; sed vulgus more humanae cupidinis
sibi tantam fatorum magnitudinem interpretati ne adversis quidem ad vera
mutabantur. Orosius (vii 9, 2) says the Jews were misled by oracles from
Mt. Carmel: Iudaei quibusdam in Carmelo monte seducti sortibus, quae
portenderent exortos a Iudaea duces rerum potituros fore, praedictumque
ad se trahentes in rebellionem exarserunt. Josephus (Bell. Iud. vi 5, 4)
holds that the ambiguous oracle, which encouraged the Jews to revolt,
really foretold the rise of Vespasian to power: τὸ ἐπάραν αὐτοὺς μάλιστα
πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ἦν χρησμὸς ἀμφίβολος ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς εὑρημένος γράμμασιν, ὡς κατὰ
τὸν καιρὸν ἐκεῖνον ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας τις αὐτῶν ἄρξει τῆς οἰκουμένης. τοῦτο οἱ μὲν ὡς
οἰκεῖον ἐξέλαβον, καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν σοφῶν ἐπλανήθησαν περὶ τὴν κρίσιν· ἐδήλου δ᾽ ἄρα
περὶ τοῦ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ τὸ λόγιον ἡγεμονίαν, ἀποδειχθέντος ἐπὶ Ἰουδαίας αὐτοκράτορος.
Hegesippus (Exscid. Hierosolym. v 44) and Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. iii 8)
reject the interpretation of Josephus, as Vespasian became ruler of the
Roman empire only and not of the whole world, and they explain the
prophecies as Messianic prophecies of Christ's dominion over the world
(cf. Daniel ii 35, 44: Micah v 2).
..
esse in fatis: cf. Claud. 43, sibi quoque in fatis esse matrimonium:
Sen. N.Q. ii 37, ita non est hoc contra fatum, sed ipsum quoque in fato
est. The phrase “in fatis esse" seems to be used first by Ovid; e.g. Met. i
256, esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, adfore tempus, quo, etc.
paruit: here, as in Aug. 95 (immolanti .. victimarum iocinera replicata
paruerunt) and Calig. 8, 5 (abunde parere arbitror), the MSS. are
decisively in favour of parere against apparere, though Bentley and
Madvig would restore the compound, Madvig saying “pareo pro appareo
(extra iuris usum) antiquissimis et Apuleio similibusque relinquendum.”
The simple verb parere in the sense of apparere is not found in Caesar,
nor in Cic. except in the legal use of paret (= ‘it is proven"); it occurs
in Virg., Stat., Mart., Quintil., etc.
caesoque praeposito: Gessius Florus, a Greek of Clazomenae, was
appointed Roman procurator of Judaea in 64 A.D. Josephus paints in lurid
colours his plundering and oppression of the Jews, and says that it was
he who provoked the Jewish rebellion in order to escape impeachment.
Three million Jews at the Feast of the Passover in 65 appealed in vain
for protection to the proconsul of Syria, and finally, goaded by wrongs,
they rejected the pacifying influences of their king Agrippa II and the
rebellion broke out in the spring of 66; cf. Joseph. Antiq. xiv 9, xviii 1,
xx 9-11; Bell. Iud. ii 15 sq.; Tac. H. v 10, duravit tamen patientia
Iudaeis usque ad Gessium Florum procuratorem; sub eo bellum ortum.
Suetonius may be incorrect in saying that Gessius Florus was slain, for
Josephus, who describes (Bell. Iud. ii 15, 6) how Florus retired to Caesarea
after some street fighting in Jerusalem, nowhere mentions his having been
slain during the revolt. Ernesti takes caeso as fugato cum magna militum
caede, which is very improbable. Orosius (vii 9), though copying Suetonius
almost verbally, has extinctisque Romanis praesidiis for caesoque praeposito,
and some would read caesoque praesidio here.
legatum Syriae consularem: this was Cestius Gallus; Tac. H. v 10,
comprimere (bellum) coeptantem Cestium Gallum Suriae legatum varia
proelia ac saepius adversa excepere. Qui ubi fato aut taedio occidit, missu
Neronis Vespasianus fortuna famaque et egregiis ministris intra duas
aestates (67 and 68 A.D.) cuncta camporum omnesque praeter Hierosolyma
urbes victore exercitu tenebat. C. Cestius Gallus was consul (suffectus) in
42; as legatus of Syria he marched against the Jews in 66 with an army
of over 33,000 including the 12th legion (Fulminata) and detachments of
2000 each from the other Syrian legions (Joseph. Bell. Iud. ii 18, 9). Не
took Joppa and entered Jerusalem, but was unable to take the Palace or
the Temple there. For some unknown reason he abandoned the siege, and
made a disastrous retreat through the pass of Beth Horon, losing 5680 men
as well as his engines and baggage. See Mommsen, Prov. Rom. Emp.
(Eng. Trans.) ii 209 sq.
=
suppetias ferentem:
opem ferentem, subvenientem. The subst.
suppetiae (only in nom. and acc.) does not seem to occur between Plautus
(who uses it freely) and Suet. except in the Bell. Afric. where we find the
phrases suppetias ire, venire, proficisci, occurrere, mittere. The verb
suppetiari is read in Cic. Att. xiv 18 (see Tyrrell and Purser) and is found
in Apuleius.
rapta aquila: apparently the "eagle" of the 12th legion, as there
were only detachments (‘‘vexillationes,” Galb. 20, 1, n.) of the other
legions with Cestius. The loss of this eagle is not mentioned elsewhere,
and the accuracy of Suet. has been doubted. Vespasian did not use the
12th legion against the Jews, but Titus, when he took over the command,
made it part of his army and Josephus (Bell. Iud. v 1) says that it was
eager to avenge the humiliation it had suffered under Cestius. When
Titus dispersed his forces after the capture of Jerusalem, he remembered
that this legion under Cestius had yielded to the Jews, and so he withdrew
it from Syria and sent it to Melitene on the Euphrates (Bell. Iud. vii 1).
industriae expertae: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, 4, Vespasianus nova senator
familia industria rebusque pacis ac militiae longe nobilis habebatur.
The passive use of expertus occurs from Livy on; other deponent participles used passively by Suetonius are adeptus, interpretatus, meditatus,
modulatus, mentitus.
nec metuendus nominis: in appointing to military commands the
emperors were on their guard against possible aspirants to the throne;
cf. Vitell. 7, 1, where Suet. says that the principal consideration which
influenced Galba in appointing Vitellius to the command in Lower Germany
was that he regarded him as non metuendus, on account of his gluttony.
Vespasian's political unimportance was a strong recommendation in Nero's
eyes.
§ 6. additis ad copias duabus legionibus, etc.: this statement is
obscure, for copias is naturally taken to mean the forces in Judaea and
there were no legions in Judaea after Cestius Gallus had been compelled
to return defeated to Syria. It is possible that by copias Suet. means
the legions available in Syria (where Mucianus was appointed as governor
to succeed Cestius); Josephus (Bell. Iud. iii 1) loosely says that
Vespasian was sent by Nero “ ληψόμενος τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῶν ἐπὶ Συρίας
στρατευμάτων." The numbers given by Suet. of alae and cohortes do not
tally with those given by Josephus in his detailed account in B.I. iii 4.
Mommsen (Prov. Rom. Emp. ii 210 sq.), following Josephus, describes the
army of Vespasian as consisting of one Syrian legion (the 10th Fretensis,
which Mommsen suggests may have suffered least in the campaign of
Cestius) and two legions of the West (the 5th Macedonica from Moesia
and the 15th Apollinaris from Pannonia, which happened to be still in
Asia after the Partho-Armenian war conducted by Corbulo).
three legions there belonged 5 alae and 18 cohortes of auxilia.
also the previous garrison in Palestine of 1 ala and 5 cohortes. The four
client-kings of the Commagenians, the Hemesenes, the Jews (see below on
provinciam), and the Nabataeans supplied in all 11,000 infantry (mainly
archers) and 4000 cavalry. The 3 legions contained 18,000 men; the 23
cohortes (10 of 1000 men, 13 of 720) contained 19,360; the 6 alae contained 3000; add to these the client-kings' contingent of 15,000, and the
total of Vespasian's command was 55,360 (Josephus gives the round
number of 60,000). Mommsen, on the ground that the above figures are
based on each division being at its utmost normal strength, would reduce
the effective aggregate number to 50,000 at most.
To these
There was
inter legatos maiore filio assumpto: Oros. vii 9,3 Titum filium suum
maiorem inter legatos habuit; nam multas et validas legiones secum in
Syriam traiecit. Titus was appointed legatus of the 15th legion (Apollinaris); see on Tit. 4, 3, legioni praepositus. M. Ulpius Traianus, father
of the emperor Trajan, was legatus of the 10th (Fretensis), and Sex.
Vettulenus Cerealis of the 5th (Macedonica).
provinciam: Becker proposed provinciam <suam>. Judaea was part
of the province of Syria from 63 to 40 B.C., and from 40 to 4 B.C. a
dependent principality under Herod the Great. In 4 B.C. it was divided
into three parts: (1) Judaea, with Samaria and Idumaea, under king
Archelaus; in 6 A.D. this became a Roman province under an imperial
procurator; (2) Batanaea and the adjoining regions, under Philip as
tetrarch; (3) Galilee and the land beyond the Jordan (Peraea), under
Herod Antipas as tetrarch. In 37-41 A.D. the three were united as a
kingdom under Herod Agrippa, but on his death in 44 Judaea became
again a procuratorial province until 70. In 53-55 Herod Agrippa II
received the districts of Batanaea, Auranitis, Trachonitis, Gaulonitis, and
Abilene, with the title of king, and also Tiberias and Tarichea in Galilee,
and Julias in Peraea. He remained faithful to the Romans during the
Jewish war. In 70 A.D., on the fall of Jerusalem, Judaea was made a
first-class imperial province under a legate with the 10th legion under his
orders.
proximas: sc. provincias, Syria and Egypt.
convertit in se: cf. Tit. 5, 1, quaqua iret, convertit homines. The full
phrase was convertere ora, oculos, etc.; e.g. Liv. xxvi 50, 1, quacumque
incedebat, converteret omnium oculos.
..
correcta
ciplinae militaris.
disciplina: so Eutrop. vii 20, 1, diligens coercitor dis-
..
oppugnatione castelli: this fortress was probably Jotapata in Galilee,
defended valiantly but unsuccessfully for 47 days by Josephus against
Vespasian in 67. Josephus (Bell. Iud. iii 7, 22) says that Vesp. was
wounded in the flat of the foot by a dart: ἔνθα τις τῶν ἀμυνομένων ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ
βάλλει τὸν Οὐεσπασιανὸν βέλει κατὰ τὸν ταρσὸν τοῦ ποδός, καὶ τιτρώσκει μὲν
ἐπιπολαίως, προεκλύσαντος τὸ βληθὲν τοῦ διαστήματος (quia vis teli spatio
defecisset). For a description of Vespasian's campaigns in 67 and 68
during which he gradually isolated Jerusalem by subduing the surrounding
districts see Mommsen, op. cit. 212 sqq.; Schiller, Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit i
381 sqq.; Bury, Stud. Rom. Emp. c. xx.
CHAPTER 5.
in spem imperii venit conceptam: cf. Tib. 14, 1, magna nec incerta
spe futurorum, quam et ostentis et praedictionibus ab initio aetatis conceperat. The combination of the two phrases in spem venire and speт
concipere is remarkable. Suetonius means that Vespasian's earlier vague
hopes now began to take a more definite form. His alternating hopes and
misgivings are mentioned in Tac. H. ii 74: Vespasianus modo in spem
erectus, aliquando adversa reputabat.
ostenta: Tacitus (H. i 10) drily observes that it was only after
Vespasian's rise to power that the Romans came to believe that such was
the secret will of fate and that he had been marked out for sovereignty
by omens and oracles: Occulta fati et ostentis ac responsis destinatum
Vespasiano liberisque eius imperium post fortunam credidimus.
§ 2. suburbano: sc. praedio; cf. Dom. 17, 3, in suburbano suo. This
ellipse of praedium is frequent in Cic. and post-Aug. writers.
quercus Marti sacra: the oak was usually sacred to Jove; cf.
Ov. M. vii 623, sacra Iovi quercus: Plin. N.H. xvi 11, aesculus Iovi sacra.
In class. prose sacer takes the gen., e.g. Cic. Verr. ii 1, 48, (Delos) illorum
deorum sacra putatur; the dat. is used in poetry and post-Aug. prose.
tres Vespasiae partus: Vespasia, wife of Flavius Sabinus, bore a
daughter (mentioned here) and then two sons, the elder being Flavius
Sabinus and the younger the emperor Vespasian (see c. 1, 3).
a frutice: this is noted in the Thes. Ling. Lat. as the only place
where frutex is used of the stirps or stem of a tree. Oudendorp explains
a frutice as meaning "ab ea parte, qua frutex, qui e radice annosae quercus
circum trunci infima pullularat, ex ipsa arbore enatus erat, dedit arbor
singulos ramos" (i.e. frutex, which properly means a bushy growth and
so the bushy growth of shoots at the base of the trunk of an oak tree, is
used here for the base of the tree itself). The reading has been suspected,
and Lipsius ingeniously suggested an frutices; Bentley, less plausibly, a
radice.
arefactum: cf. Galb. 1, silva omnis exaruit radicitus. The form arefacio is ante-class. and post-Aug.
non perannavit: “perannare” is used here like the Gr. διετίζειν “to
live through the year"; cf. Macrob. Sat. i 12, eodem quoque mense Martio
ad Annam Perennam sacrificatum itur ut annare perennareque (al.
perannareque) commode liceat. Warde Fowler (Rom. Fest. p. 51), citing
these words of Macrobius, comments: "Annare perennare is to complete the
circle of the year: cp. Suet. Vesp. 5. Anna Perenna herself is probably
a deity manufactured out of these words and the idea they conveyed...;
not exactly a deity of the year, but one whom it would be desirable to
propitiate at the beginning of the year." The expression non perannavit
is used erroneously in the spurious inscription, C.I.L. vi 412* and add.
p. 49*, of the daughter (and not the sister) of Vespasian (see Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2730). In the form “perennare” the verb is used in poetry
and post-Aug. prose, generally intrans. to last for many years,” e.g.
Ov. 4.4. iii 42, arte perennat amor; in Colum. xii 19, 2: 20, 8, it is trans.
"to make to last for years."
instar arboris: cf. Aug. 6, locus cellae penuariae instar: Ner. 31, 1,
stagnum maris instar. Suet. also uses instar for a statue or likeness
(effigies, simulacrum), Iul. 61, cuius (equi) instar pro aede Veneris .. postea
dedicavit; cf. Galb. 10, 2, e primoribus vel instar senatus (i.e. a miniature
senate) instituit: Calig. 5, quod apud Parthos iustitii instar est (i.e. represents the Roman iustitium, is a sign of public mourning).
Sabinum: see c. 1, 3.
haruspicio: see on Galb. 19, 1.
confirmatum: cf. Galb. 9, 2, confirmabatur cum secundissimis auspiciis
et ominibus, tum virginis honestae vaticinatione: Tit. 5, 1, de imperii spe
confirmatus est.
nec quicquam aliud quam: see on Dom. 21.
§ 3. aedilem: Vesp. was aedile in 38 A.D., in the reign of Gaius
(Caligula); see c. 2, 3.
verrendis viis: part of the cura urbis which was one of the functions
of the aediles (Cic. Legg. iii 3, 7, suntoque aediles curatores urbis, annonae,
ludorumque sollemnium); they were responsible for the cleansing (vias
verrere, purgare) repairing (reficere) and paving (sternere) of the streets;
cf. Plaut. Stich. 347 sqq., where Pinacium, giving orders about cleansing
the house with brooms (scopae) and watering-pots (nassiternae), is compared to an aedile.
luto
oppleri: Dio (lix 12) mentions this occurrence and the
significance which later was attached to it: πηλὸν πολὺν ἐν στενωπῷ τινι
ἰδὼν (ὁ Γάιος) ἐκέλευσεν αὐτὸν ἐς τὸ τοῦ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ τοῦ Φλαβίου ἱμάτιον,
ἀγορανομοῦντός (aedilis) τε τότε καὶ τῆς τῶν στενωπῶν καθαριότητος ἐπιμελουμένου,
ἐμβληθῆναι. καὶ τοῦτο οὕτω πραχθὲν παραχρῆμα μὲν ἐν οὐδενὶ λόγῳ ὤφθη, ὕστερον
δὲ τοῦ Οὐεπασιανοῦ τὰ πράγματα τεταραγμένα καὶ πεφυρμένα παραλαβόντος τε καὶ
καταστησαμένου ἔδοξεν οὐκ ἀθεεὶ γεγονέναι, ἀλλ᾽ ἄντικρυς αὐτῷ τὴν πόλιν ὁ Γάιος
πρὸς ἐπανόρθωσιν ἐγκεχειρικέναι.
praetextae: the robe of office of the curule aedile (as of other curule
magistrates) was the toga praetexta, the white toga bordered with purple.
Plebeian aediles could not wear the praetexta; nor had they a sella
curulis, but only a subsellium.
non defuerunt qui interpretarentur: the same phrase occurs in
Galb. 8, 2: Tit. 5, 3: Dom. 23, 2. See Kühner-Stegmann, ii 306 sq.
gremium: a place of shelter and protection; cf. Aen. ix 261, quaecumque mihi fortuna fidesque est, | in vestris pono gremiis: ib. viii 713
(of the river-god Nilus represented with a dark blue robe), pandentemque
sinus et tota veste vocantem | caeruleum in gremium latebrosaque flumina
victos.
§ 4. prandente eo
subiecit: Dio (lxvi 1) κύων, σῖτον αὐτοῦ
αἱρουμένου, χεῖρα ἀνθρωπίνην ὑπὸ τὴν τράπεζαν ὑπέβαλε. See on "prandia,”
Vitell. 13, 1.
canis extrarius: the appearance of a strange dog was regarded as an
omen; cf. Ter. Phorm. 705, quot res postilla monstra evenerunt mihi! |
intro iit in aedes ater alienus canis, etc. The adj. and subst. extrarius was
used especially as the opp. of domesticus or ex eadem familia; e.g. Ter.
Phorm. 579, hanc condicionem (“marriage proposal'") si quoi tulero
extrario: Apul. Met. viii 22, servus habens ex eodem famulitio conservam coniugem, liberae cuiusdam extrariaeque mulieris flagrabat cupidine.
e trivio: refuse (purgamenta) of all kinds and, at times, dead bodies
were thrown out at the cross-roads; cf. Petron. Satyr. 134, quae striges
comederunt nervos tuos, aut quod purgamentum nocte calcasti in trivio aut
cadaver?: Auson. Epigr. 72, abiecta in triviis inhumati glabra iacebat |
testa hominis nudum iam cute calvitium. Dogs naturally frequented the
trivia; cf. Phaedr. i 27, 11, canis trivio conceptus, et educatus stercore.
..
manum humanam: ‘“manu humana denuntiabatur fore ut Vespasiani
manu omnia regerentur. Manus nempe dextra imperii signum, cuius et
instrumentum est'” (Marcilius).
cenante irrupit: Dio (l.c.), βοῦς ἐν τῷ ἄγρῳ, ἐν ᾧ τὴν δίαιταν ὡς πλήθει
ἐποιεῖτο, δειπνοῦντι προσελθὼν ὤκλασε, καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας ὑπέθηκε.
bos arator: cf. βοῦς ἀροτήρ (Hesiod): Ov. F. i 698, cedebat taurus
arator equo. Other instances of a subst. in appos. like an adj. are intercessores tribunos (Iul. 29, 1), serpens draco (Tib. 72, 2), excubitori tribuno
(Claud. 42, 1), anus matronas (Ner. 11, 1), tironem militem (Galb. 6, 3).
cervicem summisit: as the Roman empire was to bow to Vespasian.
arbor resurrexit: Tac. H. ii 78, recursabant animo vetera omina:
cupressus arbor in agris eius conspicua altitudine repente prociderat ac
postera die eodem vestigio resurgens procera et latior virebat; grande id
prosperumque consensu haruspicum et summa claritudo iuveni admodum
Vespasiano promissa. Dio (l.c.), κυπάρισσός τε περιφανής πρόρριζος ὑπὸ σφοδροῦ
πνεύματος ἀνατραπεῖσα, ἔπειτα τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς ἀνέστη, καὶ ἀκμάζουσα
διετέλεσε. Dio's statement about the strong gale contradicts Suetonius'
words "sine ulla vi tempestatis," and Boissée proposed ὑπ᾽ οὐ σφοδροῦ. The
second downfall of this cypress, signifying the overthrow of Domitian, is
mentioned in Dom. 15, 2, arbor, quae privato adhuc Vespasiano eversa surrexerat, tunc rursus repente corruit.
cupressus: this is prob. the genitive; cf. arbor palmae, Aug. 94, 11.
The specifying gen. with arbor is found first in Liv. xxiv 3, proceris
abietis arboribus. Pliny (N.H.) uses both the nom. in appos. with arbor
and also the gen.; Varro and Quintilian have the nom., Columella always
the gen. In the Thes. Ling. Lat. “cupressus" here is taken as a nom.,
as in Tac. H. ii 78 (see preceding note).
in agro avito: = in praediis Cosanis, c. 2, 1.
sine ulla vi tempestatis evulsa: Pliny (N.H. xvi 132) gives other
examples of this: Est in exemplis et sine tempestate ullave causa alia
quam prodigi cecidisse multas (arbores) ac sua sponte resurrexisse. Factum
hoc populi Romani Quiritibus ostentum Cimbricis bellis Nuceriae in luco
Iunonis ulmo, postquam etiam cacumen amputatum erat, quoniam in aram
ipsam procumbebat, restituta sponte, ita ut protinus floreret, a quo deinde
tempore maiestas populi Romani resurrexit, quae ante vastata cladibus
fuerat. Memoratur hoc idem factum et in Philippis salice procidua atque
detruncata, et Stagiris in museo populo ("poplar'") alba, omnia fausti
ominis.
§ 5. at: at (like δε) is often used, especially in poetry, with a weakened
force as a particle of transition in passing to a fresh narration, or in an
enumeration of instances, etc. (see Hand Tursell. i 422, Kühner-Stegmann ii
84); cf. Galb. 7, 2: Dom. 4, 1: 16, 1.
in Achaia: when accompanying Nero on his musical tour (c. 4, 4).
Dio (l.c.), καὶ παρ' ὀνείρατος ἔμαθεν ὅτι, ὅταν ὁ Καῖσαρ Νέρων ὀδόντα ἀποβάλῃ,
αὐταρχήσει· καὶ τοῦτό τε τὸ κατὰ τὸν ὀδόντα τῇ ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρᾳ συνηνέχθη.
dens exemptus esset: cf. Mart. x 56, 3, eximit aut reficit dentem
Cascellius (a dentist) aegrum.
atrium: the hall or entrance-room of the house where Nero was
staying. On a journey the comites of the emperor, of whom Vespasian
was one, lived with the emperor, or provision was made for their housing
(Friedlaender, Sitteng. i¹º 79).
tantum quod: "only just,” vixdum (a gloss recenter has ousted the
genuine reading in many of the MSS.); cf. Aug. 63, 1, tantum quod
pueritiam egressus: ib. 98, 2, de navi quae tantum quod appulerat:
Ner. 6, 1, tantum quod exoriente sole. The expression is found only in
Cicero's Letters and in post-class. writers; cf. Cic. Fam. vii 23, 1, tantum
quod ex Arpinati veneram, cum mihi litterae a te redditae sunt. Suetonius
is peculiar in using it with the participle. Kühner-Stegmann, ii 272, say
that tantum quod in this sense arose from tantum (= tantillum) temporis
exactum est, quod. (Distinguish tantum quod = nisi quod, e.g. Cic. Verr. i
116, tantum quôd hominem non nominat, causam quidem totam perscribit).
§ 6. apud Iudaeam: in the vulgar speech apud c. acc. was used instead
of in c. abl. Hand (op. cit. i 414) says that in good writers it is so used
only in certain formulae such as apud forum, apud villam, but in the
comic writers and in late authors, especially Tac. and Suet., it is used of
islands, cities, etc. Cf. Nonius 522 М. (p. 840, Lindsay): Error consuetudinis ‘‘aput’” pro ‘‘in’” utitur; itaque vitiose dicimus, cum nos in
foro fuisse dicamus, aput aut ad forum fuisse, cum aput iuxta significet.
Carmeli dei: Carmēlus was the name both of the mountain and also
of the god to whom it was sacred. The mountain is a continuation of
the Antilibanus range on the borders of Phoenicia and Palestine; now
Jebel Mar Elyas (i.e. Elijah) or Kurmul. From remote antiquity it has
been a sacred place. Scylax (Periplus 42) describes it as ἱερὸν Διός.
Iamblichus (vit. Pythag. 4) says that Pythagoras dwelt for some time in
solitude in a temple on Carmel. It is familiar in Scripture history from
the story of Elijah's triumph over the priests of Baal. Tacitus (H. ii 78)
describes Vespasian's visit to Carmel: Est Iudaeam inter Suriamque
Carmelus: ita vocant montem deumque. Nec simulacrum deo aut templum
(sic tradidere maiores): ara tantum et reverentia. Illic sacrificanti
Vespasiano, cum spes occultas versaret animo, Basilides sacerdos inspectis
identidem extis: “quidquid est,” inquit, ‘“Vespasiane, quod paras, seu
domum extruere seu prolatare agros sive ampliare servitia, datur tibi
magna sedes, ingentes termini, multum hominum.” Has ambages et statim
exceperat fama et tunc aperiebat, nec quidquam magis in ore volgi;
crebriores apud ipsum sermones, quanto sperantibus plura dicuntur.
sortes: here used in its extended sense of any kind of oracular
deliverance (cf. Cic. Div. ii 56, 115: Verg. Aen. iv 346, etc.). Sortes
were properly little tablets or lots on which was written some verse or
proverb; these were mixed together, and one drawn at random was taken
as an omen. Divination by sortes of this kind was practised at Praeneste
(Suet. Tib. 63), at the Fons Aponus near Patavium (Tib. 14), and probably
at the oracle of Fortuna at Antium (Calig. 57).
quidquid cogitaret: cf. Sall. Iug. 63, where a soothsayer at Utica,
after examining the victims offered to the gods, encourages Marius:
proinde, quae animo agitabat fretus dis ageret, fortunam quam saepissume
experiretur, cuncta prospere eventura.
proventurum: = successurum.
This use of provenire (cf. προχωρεῖν) is
common in Tac. (e.g. H. iv 18, si destinata provenissent), but occurs only
here in Suet.
Iosephus: the Jewish historian, who, as he tells us himself (Vita 1),
was descended on his mother's side from Asmonaean princes and inherited
from his father the priesthood which ranked highest. He commanded the
Jewish forces in Galilee against Vespasian, and was captured at the fall
of Jotapata (67 A.D., see on Vesp. 4 ad fin.). His life was spared on the
intercession of Titus. He describes (Bell. Iud. iii 8) his interview with
the victorious Vespasian, where he said among other things to the future
emperor: “Νέρωνί με πέμπεις ; τί γάρ; οἱ μετὰ Νέρωνα μέχρι σου διάδοχοι μένουσι;
σὺ Καῖσαρ, Οὐεσπασιανέ, καὶ αὐτοκράτωρ σὺ καὶ παῖς ὁ σὸς οὗτος. Δέσμει δέ με νῦν
ἀσφαλέστερον, καὶ τήρει σαυτῷ. Δεσπότης μὲν γὰρ οὐ μόνον ἐμοῦ σύ, Καῖσαρ, ἀλλὰ
καὶ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης καὶ παντὸς ἀνθρώπων γένους.” Dio (lxvi 1) makes Josephus
predict that his liberation by Vespasian as emperor would be in a year's
time: 'Ιώσηπος δὲ ἀνὴρ Ἰουδαῖος, ἀχθείς τε ὑπ' αὐτοῦ πρότερον καὶ δεθείς, ἐγέλασε
καὶ ἔφη “Νῦν μέν με δήσεις, μετ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν δὲ λύσεις αὐτοκράτωρ γενόμενος.” He was
eleased when Vespasian was proclaimed emperor by the armies in Syria
and Judaea, and he was with Titus at the siege of Jerusalem. He accompanied Titus to Rome in 71 and was granted Roman citizenship by
Vespasian, adopting the nomen gentilicium of Flavius; he also received
an annual allowance and land in Judaea which Domitian made tax-free.
constantissime asseveravit: cf. Oros. vii 9, 3, maxime Iosephi
Iudaeorum ducis sententia, qui captus, cum in vincula coiceretur, constantissime dixerat, sicut Suetonius refert, continuo se ab eodem sed imperatore
solvendum.
§ 7. Neronem monitum per quietem: cf. Dio lxvi 1, καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ
Νέρων ἔδοξέ ποτε ἐν τοῖς ὕπνοις τὸν τοῦ Διὸς ὄχον ἐς τὴν Οὐεσπασιανοῦ οἰκίαν
εἰσαγαγεῖν. For per quietem see on c. 25.
tensam: tensae were the sacred cars richly adorned with ivory and
silver, which conveyed the statues of the gods with their decorations
(exuviae) in the solemn procession (pompa) from the Capitoline to the
Circus at the opening of the Ludi Circenses (Tit. 2). The statues were
placed on couches (pulvinaria) during the games and afterwards borne
back in the tensae to their shrines. See the illustrations in Daremberg-Saglio v 115.
sacrario: when not in use, the tensae were kept under the care of the
aediles in a special building on the Capitol known as "aedes t(h)ensarum”;
see Mommsen Staatsr. ii³ 500, Annali dell' Inst. 1858 p. 203: Jordan,
Topogr. Rom i 2, 52.
deduceret: the tensae were escorted (deducere) by the chief senators,
who, along with pueri patrimi et matrimi (i.e. children who were ingenui
and whose fathers and mothers were still alive), laid hold of the bridles
and traces, or assisted in dragging the tensae by thongs (lora) attached
for the purpose (Livy, v 41 ix 40, having ducere tensas). The most prob.
deriv. of tensa is that of Asconius on Cic. Verr. i 59 "tensae, sacra
vehicula sic dictae, quod ante eas lora tenduntur.”” In Suet. Aug. 43
we are told that even when ill Augustus accompanied the tensae in a litter
(accidit votivis Circensibus, ut correptus valitudine, lectica cubans tensas
deduceret). This deductio apparently became one of the duties of the
emperor, and Nero's dream foretold that not he but Vespasian would in
future discharge it.
...
comitia secundi consulatus ineunte Galba: these words present considerable difficulty and some (e.g. Wolf) have regarded them as a gloss
on non multo post. Galba, consul under Tiberius in 33 A.D., became consul
for the second time on Jan. 1, 69 A.D., a few days after his arrival in
Rome as emperor (Tac. H. i 1 and 11). According to Tacitus and Plutarch
(see following note) the portent occurred after the death of Galba. Moreover the meaning of comitia ineunte is by no means clear. Baumg.-Cr.
thinks that inire comitia in the sense of auspicari comitia may be defended
by the indiscriminate use of these two verbs with bellum, proelium, militiam,
etc. But if the text is sound, Ernesti and Bremi seem right in their
explanation that the miraculous event took place when Galba was going
into the electoral assembly of the people in the Campus Martius; the
actual elections were held in the senate, but the people still assembled in
the Campus Martius to hear the results announced (Dom. 10, 4, n.), and
the statue of Julius Caesar on the island in the Tiber would be visible
from the Campus. For the construction comitia consulatus cf. Auson. 419,
2 D
42, comitia consulatus mei (which suggests that sui may have fallen out
here after consulatus). Various corrections have been proposed. Marcilius
warmly approved of a reading in comitio secundum consulatum ineunte
Galba, introduced by Ursinus from his alleged "codex"; Burman
hazarded several conjectures, e.g. non multo post comitia secundi consulatus,
ineunte Capitolium Galba, and post comitia secundum consulatum ineunte
Galba; Oudendorp would read non multo post initia secundi consulatus,
intereunte Galba. But in the 15 other passages where non (nec, neque,
haud) multo post is used by Suetonius post is always an adv., not a prep.
statuam conversam: presaging the transfer of the empire from
the West to the East (i.e. to Vespasian commanding in the East). Tacitus
(H. i 86) mentions it among the alarming prodigia reported when Vitellius
was advancing against Otho: statuam divi Iulii in insula Tiberini amnis
sereno et immoto die ab Occidente in Orientem conversam. Plutarch (Oth.
4) says it happened at the time when the partizans of Vespasian were
becoming openly active: τὸν ἐν μεσοποταμίᾳ νήσῳ Γαΐου Καίσαρος ἀνδριάντα μήτε
σεισμοῦ γεγονότος μήτε πνεύματος ἀφ᾽ ἑσπέρας μεταστραφέντα πρὸς τὰς ἀνατολάς· ὅ
φασι συμβῆναι περὶ τὰς ἡμέρας ἐκείνας ἐν αἷς οἱ περὶ Οὐεσπασιανὸν ἐμφανῶς
ἤδη τῶν πραγμάτων ἀντελαμβάνοντο.
acie Betriacensi: see on Oth. 9, 2.
duas aquilas: typifying Otho and Vitellius; cf. Aesch. Agam. 115,
where two eagles typifying Agamemnon and Menelaus appear to the Greek
host. The story in Tac. H. ii 50 is quite different: Die, quo Bedriaci
certabatur, avem invisitata specie apud Regium Lepidum (between Parma
and Modena) celebri luco consedisse incolae memorant, nec deinde coetu
hominum aut circumvolitantium alitum territam pulsamve donec Otho se
ipse interficeret; tum ablatam ab oculis; et tempora reputantibus initium
finemque miraculi cum Othonis exitu competisse. Dio (lxiv 10) agrees
with Tac.: ὅπου τέ φασι πρὸ τῆς μάχης ἄλλα τε φανῆναι σημεῖα, καί τινα ὄρνιν
ἐξαίσιον, ὁποῖον οὐ πώποτε ἑωράκεσαν, ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας ὀφθῆναι.
tertiam: typifying Vespasian, who conquered Vitellius the conqueror
of Otho. Cf. the ἔφεδρος or suppositicius in boxing or wrestling contests
who met the victor of a preceding round. Valerius Maximus (i 4, 6)
records an earlier instance of contending eagles foreshadowing the issue
of a battle: -M. Brutus cum reliquias exercitus sui adversus Caesarem et
Antonium eduxisset, duae aquilae ex diversis castris advolaverunt, et edita
inter se pugna, ea, quae a parte Bruti fuerat, male mulcata fugit. See
Plut. Brut. 48.
CHAPTER 6.
§ 2. Moesiaci exercitus bina
milia: the province of Moesia
(Vitell. 15, 1, n.) was occupied by three legions, the 3rd (Gallica), 7th
(Claudia), and 8th (Augusta). Suetonius says here that it was not till
after Otho's death that detachments of these legions reached Aquileia.
Tacitus (H. ii 46) says that an advance guard from Moesia (praemissi e
Moesia) were with Otho just after his defeat at Bedriacum and encouraged
him by reporting that the Moesian legions had entered Aquileia; also in
H. ii 85 Tacitus speaks of the Moesian legions as being at Aquileia, where
they maltreated the messengers who brought news of Otho's death, tore
the standards which displayed the name of Vitellius, and finally plundered
the military chest. Spooner (on H. ii 46), following Lipsius, gratuitously
accuses Suetonius of mixing up the detachments from the Moesian with
those from the Pannonian legions mentioned in H. ii 11, Laeta interim
Othoni principia belli, motis ad imperium eius e Dalmatia Pannoniaque
exercitibus. Fuere quattuor legiones, e quibus bina milia praemissa; ipsae
modicis intervallis sequebantur. Hardy (in an article "Tacitus as a military
historian," J. Ph. xxxi 136) rightly defends the accuracy of Suetonius,
arguing that he had probably derived his information from his father who
was a tribune in the 13th legion from Pannonia which fought for Otho
(see Oth. 10, 1), and that various incidents mentioned by Tacitus (H. ii 85,
96 iii 5) clearly imply that the Moesian legions could not have been at
Aquileia, though detachments may have been. Furthermore the legions
were certainly in Moesia in July or August, when they declared for
Vespasian (H. ii 85), and Tacitus says nothing of their having been sent
back there, though he gives a precise account of the Othonian legions sent
back to their provinces by the victorious Vitellius (H. ii 66, 67). Suetonius
is alone in his statement that it was the Moesian detachments at Aquileia
who first selected Vespasian as emperor and, though checked for the time,
inspired the later action of the legions in Egypt and the East. Tacitus
(H. ii 85), after describing the acclamation of Vespasian by the armies in
Egypt, Judaea, and Syria, mentions how the army of Illyricum (i.e.
Moesia, Pannonia, Dalmatia) came over to Vespasian's side and hastened
his movements by its ardour. Josephus (Bell. Iud. iv 10) narrates the
events in the same order. This too is a matter on which Suetonius may
have had special information, though Dessau (Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit ii 1.
346 n.) characterizes his account as one of his many blunders ("ein Irrtum
Suetons, wie sich manche bei ihm finden'"). Dessau holds that the three
legions in Moesia felt themselves compromised by the gross insubordination
of their detachments sent to Italy. When these detachments had been
quieted and had rejoined the main body in Moesia, the reunited legions
were uneasy lest they should have to pay the penalty to the new emperor
Vitellius; so they looked about for some suitable person to support
against Vitellius, and decided to throw in their lot with Vespasian who
had been chosen by the armies in the East.
vim vitae suae attulisse: see Oth. 11.
setius: for the forms setius and sequius see on Tit. 5, 3.
Aquileiam: the capital of Venetia in the N.E. corner of Italy at
the head of the Adriatic, mod. Aquileja or Aglar.
perseveraverunt: sc. ire (= iter continuaverunt), a rare elliptical use,
for which cf. Caes. B.C. iii 14, 2, una ex his (navibus), quae perseveravit..,
delata Oricum atque a Bibulo expugnata est.
quasi: in a causal sense, see on Tit. 5, 1.
grassati: grassari "to go," "to proceed" was used especially of
proceeding, or acting, with violence (e.g. grassari ferro, veneno). Cf.
Aug. 67, 2, superbe avareque in provincia grassatos: Calig. 56, 1, ita
bacchantem atque grassantem: Galb. 14, 2, his diverso vitiorum genere
grassantibus. Sometimes with in (cf. saevire in), e.g. Ner. 36, 1, пес
minore superbia in exteros grassatus est; and with adversus, e.g. Calig.
34, 1, nec minore superbia saevitiaque paene adversus omnis aevi
..
2D2
hominum genus grassatus est: Suetonius also uses grassator for "a footpad" (e.g. Aug. 43, 1) and grassatura for brigandage" (e.g. Tib. 37, 1).
timerent: cf. Tac. (l.c.), unde metus et ex metu consilium: posse
imputari Vespasiano, quae apud Vitellium excusanda erant, i.e. that acts
might be made a merit of with Vespasian, which would have to be excused
to Vitellius.
consilium inierunt eligendi
imperatoris: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, 3,
milites praedicti (i.e. of Moesia and Pannonia), postquam Othonem praetoriis, Vitellium Germanicianis legionibus factum comperere, aemuli, ut
inter se solent, ne dissimiles viderentur, Vespasianum perpulere: Oros. vii
8, 3, de Hispania siquidem ilico Galba surrexerat; quo mox oppresso, Otho
Romae, Vitellius in Germania, Vespasianus in Syria imperia simul atque
arma rapuerunt.
Hispaniensi exercitu: Galba was acclaimed as emperor by the 6th
legion in Spain; and thus, as Tacitus (H. i 4) says, a constitutional secret
was disclosed that an emperor could be appointed elsewhere than at Rome
(evolgato imperii arcano, posse principem alibi quam Romae fieri). See
Galb. 10.
praetoriano: the praetorians, disgusted with the parsimony of Galba,
offered to support Otho (Tac. H. i 23 sq.); he was saluted as Imperator
by a handful of them who carried him off to the praetorian camp, the
gates of which were at once thrown open and the revolution was complete
(ib. 27, 36: Suet. Oth. 6).
The affection and loyalty (animus fidesque)
of the praetorians towards Otho are described by Suetonius (Oth. 8); and
Tacitus (H. ii 46) calls them ‘“proprius Othonis miles.”
Germaniciano: Suetonius is the first to use this adj., applying it to
the army in Germany; cf. Tib. 25, 2: Galb. 20, 1: Oth. 8, 1. It is
found also in Eutrop. vii 17, x 15; Aur. Vict. Caes. 8, 3. A similar formation
is ‘‘urbaniciani" for the soldiers garrisoned in the city (of Rome), Spart.
Carac. 4, Get. 6: Paul. Dig. iv 6, 35; “Illyricianus” occurs in Treb. Poll.
Claud. 14. For the proclamation of Vitellius as emperor by the legions
in Germany see Oth. 8, 1: Vitell. 8, 1.
§ 3. legione tertia: the transference (in 67-68) of the 3rd (Gallica)
legion from Syria to Moesia is mentioned in Tac. H. ii 74: tertiam
legionem, quod e Syria in Moesiam transisset, suam ("devoted to himself'") numerabat (Vespasianus). It repulsed with great slaughter an
invasion of Moesia by the Sarmatae (H. i 79). It was the first legion in
Moesia to declare for Vespasian; H. ii 85, Adcelerata interim Vespasiani
coepta Illyrici exercitus studio transgressi in partes. Tertia legio exemplum
ceteris Moesiae legionibus praebuit.
nomen eius vexillis inscripserunt: Tacitus (H. ii 85) mentions that
the Moesian legions at Aquileia tore the ensigns which bore the name of
Vitellius: laceratis vexillis nomen Vitellii praeferentibus. For this sign
of revolt cf. H. iii 13, miles praescriptum Vespasiani nomen, proiectas
Vitellii effigies aspexit: iii 31, primores castrorum nomen atque imagines
Vitellii amoliuntur. Under the Empire the name of the emperor and of
the corps was embroidered, probably in gold, on the vexilla which were
made of cloth generally red, sometimes purple (or white). A similar practice
prevailed under the Republic; cf. Dio xl 18 (speaking of the army of
Crassus in Parthia in 53 Β.C.), σημεῖον δέ τι τῶν μεγάλων, τῶν τοῖς ἱστίοις
ἐοικότων καὶ φοινικᾶ γράμματα ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς πρὸς δήλωσιν τοῦ τε στρατοῦ καὶ τοῦ
στρατηγοῦ σφων τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος ἐχόντων, ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν . . ἐνέπεσε.
numeris: "detachments," also called vexillationes (Galb. 20, 1) or
vexilla as serving under a vexillum instead of their proper signa; cf. Tac.
H. i 6, multi numeri e Germania ac Britannia et Illyrico: id. Agr. 18,
sparsi per provinciam numeri.
Tiberius Alexander: a Jew, son of the alabarch in Alexandria and
nephew of the writer Philo. He renounced the Jewish faith and was
made procurator of Judaea by Claudius (c. 46 A.D.). He accompanied
Corbulo in his Armenian campaign in 64 (Tac. A. xv 28). Under Nero
he was made prefect of Egypt (67-70 A.D.). An edict issued by him as
prefect is still preserved (Rhein. Mus. ii 133 sqq.), in which his name
appears as Τιβέριος Ἰούλιος ᾿Αλέξανδρος. During his administration there
was a riot between the Jews and Greeks in Alexandria, and 50,000 Jews
were slain by the Roman legionaries. He was rewarded for his devotion
to Vespasian's cause by being made lieutenant-general of the army under
Titus, and he was present at the capture of Jerusalem. See Joseph.
Antiq. xx 4 sq.: Bell. Iud. ii 11, 15, 18, etc.
praefectus Aegypti: Alexander had been raised to the rank of eques
by Claudius. The prefect of Egypt by the arrangement of Augustus
must be an eques; cf. Tac. H. i 11, Aegyptum copiasque, quibus coercetur,
iam inde a divo Augusto equites Romani obtinent loco regum: ita visum
expedire, provinciam aditu difficilem, annonae fecundam, superstitione ac
lascivia discordem et mobilem, insciam legum, ignaram magistratuum, domi
retinere. Regebat tum Tiberius Alexander, eiusdem nationis. Alexander's
espousal of the cause of Vespasian is referred to in Tac. H. ii 74, praefectus
Aegypti Ti. Alexander consilia sociaverat.
primus
legiones adegit: Tac. H. ii 79, Initium ferendi ad
Vespasianum imperii Alexandriae coeptum, festinante Tiberio Alexandro,
qui Kalendis Iuliis sacramento eius legiones adegit. See on Galb. 11, in
verba sua iurasse cognovit.
=
principatus dies: primus principatus dies (Tac. l.c.), usually called
dies imperii; in later authors natalis imperii (e.g. Spart. vit. Hadr. 4).
The dies imperii, marking the beginning of a reign, was the day on which
the proconsular imperium was conferred on the new Princeps. It is a
disputed point whether this imperium could legitimately be conferred by
either the senate or the army, or whether the senate exclusively had the
right to confer it, so that in cases where the title Imperator was conferred
by the soldiers it required the formal confirmation of the senate.
former view is defended by Hardy on Plin. ad Trai. 52, following Mommsen
Staatsr. ii³ 842 sq.; the latter by Bury, Stud. Rom. Emp. ch. ii n. E,
following Herzog Röm. Staatsverfassung ii 610 sq.
The
Iudaicus exercitus: consisting of three legions, the 5th (Macedonica),
10th (Fretensis), and 15th (Apollinaris). Cf. Vitell. 15, 1. Josephus
(Bell. Iud. iv 10), from a desire to claim the honour for his country, says
that the proclamation of Vespasian as emperor took place in Judaea
earlier than in Egypt, and that Vespasian wrote to Tiberius Alexander to
ask for his support.
Idus Iul.: i.e. the 11th of July; Tacitus, however, says that it
was on the 3rd (quinto Nonas Iulias), and his statement has been generally
accepted as correct. Ernesti goes so far as to substitute Nonas for Idus
in our text. Tacitus also says that before the Ides (15th) of July the
whole of Syria had taken the oath of allegiance to Vespasian: c. 81, ante
Idus Iulias Syria omnis in eodem sacramento fuit. Fabia (Les Sources de
Tacite p. 155) infers that Suetonius confused the two armies in Syria and
Judaea.
=
§ 4. iactatum:
in manibus hominum versatum. More usually Suet.
has iactari in the sense of in ore hominum esse; e.g. Galb. 6, 2: 12,3:
Oth. 12, 2: Vesp. 1, 4.
extrema obtestatione: the letter probably purported to convey a
last charge written by the vanquished Otho in the hours before his suicide
(see Oth. 10, 2); cf. Suet. vit. Horat. 1, extremis iudiciis (of a last will
and testament). But extrema might also mean "most urgent."
obtestatio (adjuration, solemn entreaty) cf. Tib. 40, revocante (Tiberium)
assidua obtestatione populo: Vitell. 2, 3, suorum obtestatione.
For
rumor: this report was spread by Mucianus; cf. Tac. c. 80, Nihil
aeque provinciam exercitumque accendit quam quod asseverabat Mucianus
statuisse Vitellium, ut Germanicas legiones in Syriam ad militiam
opulentam quietamque transferret; contra Syriacis legionibus Germanica
hiberna caelo ac laboribus dura mutarentur.
praesidibus provinciarum : praeses (ἡγεμών) was a general title
denoting a governor; cf. Macer Digest i 18, 1, praesidis nomen generale
est, eoque et proconsules et legati Caesaris et omnes provincias regentes,
licet senatores sint, praesides appellantur. Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 240 n. 3)
points out that praeses provinciae is not found till after the first century,
when it is used by Tacitus (A. vi 41, xii 45), by the younger Pliny (Pan. 70),
by Trajan (ep. ad Plin. 44) and by Suetonius (Iul. 35, 1; Aug. 23, 1;
Tib. 32, 2; 41; Claud. 17, 3; Oth. 7, 1; Dom. 6, 2; 8, 2). At a later
period it came to be applied particularly to the governors of the lowest
class, those of equestrian rank, who had no distinguishing title; cf.
Mattingly, Imp. Civ. Serv. p. 147.
Licinius Mucianus: consul in 52 under Claudius, but afterwards he
roused that emperor's suspicions and was forced to withdraw into a retired
part of Asia "as like an exile as he was later like an emperor" (Tac.
H. i 10, tam prope ab exule fuit quam postea a principe). Restored to
favour by Nero he was made governor of Syria in '67 with command of
four legions, while Vespasian was in Judaea in command of three. He
called on Vespasian to seize the throne (H. ii 76) and proclaimed him
emperor in the theatre at Antioch (ib. 80). He was appointed to act as
general against Vitellius, while Vespasian and Titus remained behind in
the East (ib. 82). According to Dio (lxv 8) he hoped to share the imperial
power, though Vespasian bore the name of emperor: ὁ Μουκιανὸς ἰσχυρῶς
προσέκειτο (instabat) ἐλπίσας τὸ μὲν ὄνομα τῆς ἀρχῆς ἐκεῖνον ἕξειν, αὐτὸς δὲ διὰ
τὴν ἐπιείκειαν αὐτοῦ ἰσομοιρήσειν. For the character of Mucianus see c. 13
and notes there.
Vologaesus: the correct form of this name is uncertain: “Vologeses" Vologaeses” “Vologesus'” ،“Vologaesus" are all found in the
MSS. of Tacitus, and "Vologesus" is a variant here. See Prosop. Imp.
Rom. iii 475; Furneaux on Tac. A. xii 14. Vologaesus I was king of
Parthia, 51-78 A.D. He made repeated efforts to establish his brother
Tiridates as king of Armenia. This brought him into conflict with the
Roman forces under Corbulo, peace being ultimately made in 63 by
Tiridates consenting to receive the crown of Armenia as a gift from
the hands of Nero at Rome. Vespasian sent envoys to the Parthians
when he was preparing for war (Tac. H. ii 82) and he was already
aware of the defeat and death of Vitellius when envoys from
Vologaesus arrived at Alexandria with the offer of 40,000 men (H. iv 51).
Vespasian thanked the king and directed him to send ambassadors to the
senate and to learn for himself that peace had been restored; this he did
and secured a renewal of his alliance with Rome (Suet. Ner. 57). He
sent a golden crown to Titus on the fall of Jerusalem (Joseph. Bell. Iud. vii
5). His request for Roman auxiliaries, with one of Vespasian's sons as
their leader, to aid him against the Alani was refused; see Dom. 2, 2.
deposita simultate: the initial distrust and jealousy between Mucianus
and Vespasian as commanders of strong forces in neighbouring provinces
was removed largely through the conciliatory agency of Vespasian's son
Titus; cf. Tac. H. ii 5, Ceterum hic (Mucianus) Syriae, ille (Vespasianus)
Iudaeae praepositus, vicinis provinciarum administrationibus invidia discordes, exitu demum Neronis positis odiis in medium consuluere, primum
per amicos, dein praecipua concordiae fides Titus prava certamina communi
utilitate aboleverat, natura atque arte compositus alliciendis etiam Muciani
moribus.
Syriacum promisit exercitum: there were four legions (3rd Gallica,
4th Scythica, 6th Ferrata, 12th Fulminata) in Syria when Mucianus was
appointed governor (Tac. H. і 10). The 3rd was transferred to Moesia
(see on § 3). Mucianus, in urging Vespasian to strike for empire, says to
him (H. ii 76): Tibi e Iudaea et Syria et Aegypto novem legiones (4 in
Syria, 3 in Judaea, 2 in Egypt viz. 3rd Cyrenaica and 22nd Deiotariana)
integrae, nulla acie exhaustae, non discordia corruptae, sed firmatus usu
miles et belli domitor externi; classium alarum cohortium robora et fidissimi reges et tua ante omnes experientia.
sagittariorum: Tacitus (H. iv 51) calls them equites, the famous
Parthian bowmen being cavalry.
CHAPTER 7.
ducibus copiisque praemissis: Mucianus was the commander of
the forces which Vespasian sent ahead from the East; but Antonius
Primus, without waiting for the arrival of Mucianus, advanced into Italy
with the legions of Moesia, Dalmatia, and Pannonia, and defeated the
Vitellians; see on Vitell. 18. Tacitus (H. ii 83) describes the troops of
Mucianus and the manner of his march: Mucianus cum expedita manu,
socium magis imperii quam ministrum agens, non lento itinere, ne cunctari
videretur, neque tamen properans, gliscere famam ipso spatio sinebat, gnarus
modicas vires sibi et maiora credi de absentibus; sed legio sexta et tredecim
vexillariorum milia ingenti agmine sequebantur. The 6th legion had been
stationed in Syria since the reign of Tiberius; the 13,000 vexillarii were
most probably detachments of 2,600 from each of the five legions left
behind, two in Syria and three in Judaea (Heraeus ad loc.).
Alexandriam transiit: Dio lxv 9, τὸν μὲν Μουκιανὸν ἐς τὴν Ἰταλίαν ἐπὶ τὸν
Οὐιτέλλιον ἔπεμψεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐς τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἐκομίσθη: Oros. vii 9, 3, per
Alexandriam profectus est Romam; sed cognita interfectione Vitelli paulisper Alexandriae substitit. Titus was left to carry on the war against the
Jews; Tac. H. ii 82, Titum instare Iudaeae, Vespasianum obtinere claustra
Aegypti placuit: sufficere videbantur adversus Vitellium pars copiarum et
dux Mucianus et Vespasiani nomen ac nihil arduum fatis ("the destiny
before which all difficulties vanish," Church and Brodribb).
claustra Aegypti: usually explained as Alexandria and Pelusium (cf.
Hirtius, B. Alex. 26, tota Aegyptos maritimo accessu Pharo, pedestri
Pelusio, velut claustris munita existimatur); but Alexandria alone may be
meant, as in Liv. xlv 11 Pelusium is called claustra Aegypti, so too Philae
in Luc. x 313. Braithwaite explains claustra Aegypti as "the stronghold
of Egypt," Aegypti being a genitive of definition, but this interpretation
finds no support in any of the uses of claustrum cited in the Thes. Ling.
Lat. Vespasian argued that by controlling Egypt, the key of the corn-supply (claustra annonae), and by cutting off the revenues of the richest
provinces (Syria, Asia, and Egypt), the army of Vitellius could be forced
to surrender by lack of corn and pay (Tac. H. iii 8). For the vital
importance of the occupation of Egypt cf. Tac. A. ii 59, Augustus ..
seposuit ("kept for himself'") Aegyptum, ne fame urgueret Italiam, quisquis eam provinciam claustraque terrae ac maris quamvis levi praesidio
adversum ingentes exercitus insedisset: id. H. i 11 (quoted on c. 6, 3
praefectus Aegypti).
capturus auspicium: Tac. H. iv 82, altior inde Vespasiano cupido
adeundi sacram sedem (Serapidis dei), ut super rebus imperii consuleret.
The phrase capere auspicium occurs also in Apul. Met. ix 8; cf. c. augurium
(Aug. 95): с. omen (Cic. Div. i 104): c. praesagia belli (Luc. vii 331).
aedem Serapidis: the splendour of this temple is described in Amm.
Marc. xxii 16, 12: His accedunt altis sufflata fastigiis templa, inter quae
eminet Serapeum, quod licet minuatur exilitate verborum, atriis tamen
columnariis amplissimis et spirantibus signorum figmentis et reliqua operum
multitudine ita est exornatum, ut post Capitolium, quo se venerabilis Roma
in aeternum attollit, nihil orbis terrarum ambitiosius cernat. The worship
of Serapis (or Sarapis) prevailed at Alexandria from c. 300 B.C. to c.
400 A.D. Many divergent accounts of its introduction are collected in
Plut. De Is. et Osir. 28, 29 and Tac. H. iv 83, 84. Some said that
Ptolemy I (323-285 в.с.) in obedience to a vision brought the colossal
statue from Sinope in Pontus; others that Ptolemy III (247-222) introduced the god from Seleucia in Syria, or from Memphis in Egypt where
a large Serapeum was excavated in 1850 by Mariette Bey. The Serapeum
was a temple erected in connexion with the sepulchres of the dead Apis
bulls, whose mummies were placed there in subterranean corridors described
by Bevan, Ptolemaic Egypt p. 41. The name of the god is a blend of
Osiris and Apis, the Egyptian Osir-Hapi; see Tit. 5, 3, n. Macrobius
(Sat. i 7) says that the Egyptian priests of the older faith only accepted
the worship of Serapis when forced to do so by the Ptolemies; but he
was the principal god in the Greek and Roman towns of Egypt.
identification of Serapis with various other divinities is mentioned in Tac.
The
(l.c.): deum ipsum multi Aesculapium, quod medeatur aegris corporibus,
quidam Osirin, antiquissimum illis gentibus numen, plerique Iovem ut
rerum omnium potentem, plurimi Ditem patrem (i.e. Pluto), insignibus
quae in ipso manifesta, aut per ambages coniectant. The statue of Serapis
at Alexandria perished when the temple was destroyed by Theodosius in
389 A.D. The worship of Serapis was introduced into Italy through Sicily
and the Greek towns of Campania in the 2nd cent. B.C. For the triumph
of the cults of Isis and Serapis in the Western world see Dill, Rom.
Society from Nero to M. Aurelius 560 sqq.
summotis omnibus: cf. the story as told in Tac. H. iv 82: Arceri
templo cunctos iubet. Atque ingressus intentusque numini, respexit pone
tergum e primoribus Aegyptiorum nomine Basiliden, quem procul
Alexandria plurium dierum itinere et aegro corpore detineri haud ignorabat.
Percontatur sacerdotes num illo die Basilides templum inisset; percontatur obvios num in urbe visus sit: denique missis equitibus explorat
illo temporis momento octoginta milibus passuum afuisse. Tunc divinam
speciem et vim responsi ex nomine Basilidis interpretatus est. This last
sentence is explained by Doederlein: “Tunc agnovit illum, quem pone
tergum conspexit, ipsum deum fuisse responsi loco apparentem, qui consulenti sub persona Basilidis fortunam principalem (βασιλείαν) portenderet."
verbenas: verbenae was used in the general sense of greenery of any
kind (leaves, twigs, branches) employed for sacred purposes; cf. Donatus
on Ter. Andr. 726: verbenae sunt omnes herbae frondesque festae. At
times the term denotes more specifically rosemary, myrtle, bay, olive, and
vervain itself (verbenaca, ἱερὰ βοτάνη); so Serv. on Aen. xii 120: Verbena
proprie est herba sacra, ros marinus, ut multi volunt,
abusive tamen
verbenas iam vocamus omnes frondes sacratas, ut est laurus, oliva, et
myrtus. For the various purposes (offerings, wreaths, etc.) for which
verbenae were utilised see Daremberg-Saglio, v 736.
..
panificia: panificium is used by Varro (L.L. v 105) of the process
of breadmaking, by Celsus (ii 18) of the bread that is made. Here it
seems to mean a sacrificial cake such as those offered to Osiris which are
called popana in Juv. vi 541, tenui popano corruptus Osiris (πόπανα =
πλακούντια πλατέα καὶ λεπτὰ καὶ περιφερῆ, Schol. ad Plat. Rep. v 227). So
at Roman sacrifices placentae or liba were used.
Basilides: the priest consulted by Vespasian on Mount Carmel (see
c. 5, 6) bore, according to Tac. H. ii 78, the same name, a name (from
βασιλεύς “king") which augured well for Vespasian's hopes of empire.
libertus: Tacitus (H. iv 82) describes Basilides as an Egyptian noble
(e primoribus Aegyptiorum), and Suet. may be incorrect in his description,
though his version of the story differs in other respects from that of Tac.
(e.g. Tac. makes Vespasian's visit to the Serapeum a consequence of the
miraculous cures which he had effected). Torrentius, Marcilius, and others
regard libertus as a mere interpolation of some ‘“malus grammaticus.’”
Casaubon's theory is that it may have got into the text through a dittography of the last two syllables of Basilides. Oudendorp proposed liberius;
Bentley uberius. I would suggest Libye ortus. Ernesti defends libertus
on the ground that Vespasian would have been familiar with the appearance of one of his own freedmen, whereas it is improbable that on his
first visit to Alexandria he would have known this Egyptian noble, and
that the very fact that he had given Basilides his freedom was a happy
omen for his deliverance of Rome from oppression. We know of another
Basilides, probably a procurator, who is mentioned as an imperial freedman
(Καίσαρος ἀπελεύθερος) in a decree of the prefect of Egypt in 49 A.D. (C.I.G.
4956; Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. i 229).
advenere litterae: Suetonius speaks as if the news of the defeat of
Vitellius (near the end of October) and of his death (near the end of
December) reached Vespasian at Alexandria simultaneously. Tacitus is
more precise. In H. iii 48 he says that Vespasian had not yet reached
Alexandria when he got news of his victory: Vespasianum Cremonensis
proelii nuntius in Aegypto adsequitur. Eo properantius Alexandriam
pergit, etc.; in iv 51 he says that many Romans of every rank risked the
perils of the wintry sea to bring tidings to Vespasian at Alexandria of
the fall of Vitellius: ut Vespasiano post Cremonensem pugnam et prosperos
undique nuntios, cecidisse Vitellium multi cuiusque ordinis, pari audacia
fortunaque hibernum mare adgressi, nuntiavere.
Cremonam: the two battles known as the battles of Betriacum (or
Bedriacum) were fought much nearer to Cremona; see on Oth. 9, 2.
Cremona was very loyal to Vitellius, and after the second battle (Oct., 69),
in which the Vitellians were routed, Antonius Primus captured, sacked,
and burned the city.
in urbe interemptum: as described in Vitell. 17.
§ 2. auctoritas.. maiestas: similarly Dio (lxvi 8) says that Vespasian
was invested with σεμνότης by the miracles which he performed at
Alexandria: τὸ θεῖον τούτοις αὐτὸν ἐσέμνυνεν (his rebus numen eum venerabilem effecit); cf. Tac. iv 81, multa miracula evenere, queis caelestis favor
et quaedam in Vespasianum inclinatio numinum ostenderetur.
ut scilicet inopinato principi: scilicet is quite pleonastic after ut
(= utpote), and its genuineness has been suspected. Torrentius approved
the reading ut solet given in one of the MSS. which he used; but ut solet
is probably due to ut illic assolet a few lines above.
There is another
remarkable pleonasm in Tit. 7, 3, abstinuit alieno, ut si quis umquam,
where see note.
e plebe quidam: cf. Tac. (l.c.): E plebe Alexandrina quidam oculorum
tabe notus genua eius advolvitur remedium caecitatis exposcens gemitu,
monitu Serapidis dei, quem dedita superstitionibus gens ante alios colit;
precabaturque principem ut genas et oculorum orbes dignaretur respergere
oris excremento. Alius manum aeger, eodem deo auctore, ut pede ac
vestigio Caesaris calcaretur orabat.
debili crure: Tac. says manum aeger, and so Dio (lxvi 8) Οὐεσπασιανὸς
τυφλόν τέ τινα, καὶ ἕτερον οὐκ ἀρτίχειρα, . . . τοῦ μὲν τὴν χεῖρα πατήσας, τοῦ δὲ
τοῖν ὀφθαλμοῖν προσπτύσας, ὑγιεῖς ἀπέφηνε.
pro tribunali: "at the front of the tribunal," having, as it were,
the tribunal behind him; cf. pro suggestu (Caes., etc.) of a speaker standing
forward on the platform, and pro rostris, which is used by post-Aug.
writers of speakers (e.g. Calig. 10, 1, defunctam pro rostris laudavit)
and of statues, etc., on the Rostra (e.g. Vitell. 3, 1). Tenney Frank
(Rivista di Filologia lii 1, 1925), discussing phrases like pro tribunali
where the original meaning of pro was "before," says that tribunal
originally signified the seat of the tribunes, on whom the orator turned his
back; afterwards it was used to denote the fixed platform on which this
seat came to be placed (Class. Quart. xx 1, 1926).
per quietem: cf. Dio (l.c.), ἐξ ὕψεως τῶν ὀνειράτων. We constantly
read of dreams in connexion with Serapis: the bringing of the statue of
the god from Sinope to Alexandria was due to a vision which appeared
to Ptolemy per quietem (Tac. H. iv 83); cf. Cic. Div. ii 59, qui (= quo) igitur
convenit aegros a coniectore ('interpreter’”) somniorum potius quam a
medico petere medicinam? an Aesculapius, an Serapis potest nobis praescribere per somnium curationem valetudinis, Neptunus gubernantibus non
potest?: Artemid. Oneirocr. v 92, νοσῶν τις εὔξατο τῷ Σεράπιδι, εἰ μέλλει
σωθήσεσθαι, τὴν δεξιὰν αὐτῷ χεῖρα ὄναρ ἐπισείεσθαι, εἰ δὲ μή, ἀριστεράν. Sleeping
in the temples of Serapis and Aesculapius (ἐγκοίμησις, incubatio) in order
to get such visions was a common practice; Strabo (xvii 801) says that
the most distinguished men used to sleep in the temple of Serapis at
Canobus, to have cures revealed to them.
inspuisset: cf. Plaut. Capt. 550, qui insputatur morbus (epilepsy,
comitialis morbus). For the supposed curative effects of saliva see Plin.
N.H. xxviii 7, where ophthalmia, among other diseases, is said to yield to
it. Spitting was also supposed to avert the "evil eye" and to aid the
effects of medicine: Plin. (l.c.), terna despuere deprecatione in omri
medicina mos est atque ita effectus adiuvare. In the N.T. the healing of
a deaf man and of a blind man by spittle are mentioned among the
miracles, and Casaubon, in his note on our passage, says: "Agnoscis,
pie lector, falsam imitationem miraculorum Christi. Sic solitus illudere
hominibus & δαίμων.” David Hume in his famous sceptical Essay on
Miracles adduces this miracle of Vespasian. Spartianus, vit. Hadr. 25,
mentions two cases of blindness being cured by contact with the emperor
Hadrian. Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, was said to have been able to cure
splenetic persons by touching them with his toe (Plin. N.H. vii 20).
§ 3. cum vix fides esset
successuram: for the constr. see on
Oth. 5, 2, haud dubia fiducia plures adfuturos.
ne experiri quidem auderet: Tacitus (iv 81) describes how Vespasian
was gradually induced to make the attempt: Vespasianus primo inridere,
aspernari; atque illis instantibus modo famam vanitatis metuere, modo
obsecratione ipsorum et vocibus adulantium in spem induci. Postremo
aestimari a medicis iubet an talis caecitas ac debilitas ope humana superabiles forent. Medici varie disserere: huic non exesam vim luminis, et
redituram si pellerentur obstantia; illi elapsos in pravum artus, si salubris
vis adhibeatur, posse integrari. Id fortasse cordi deis, et divino ministerio
principem electum, denique patrati remedii gloriam penes Caesarem, inriti
ludibrium penes miseros fore. Igitur Vespasianus cuncta fortunae suae
patere ratus nec quicquam ultra incredibile, laeto ipse voltu, erecta quae
adstabat multitudine, iussa exsequitur. Statim conversa ad usum manus,
ac caeco reluxit dies. Utrumque, qui interfuere, nunc quoque memorant,
postquam nullum mendacio pretium.
pro contione: in front of the assembled populace, facing them; a
very favourite phrase with Suet. who uses it twenty times (e.g. Galb. 17,
Oth. 6, 3). For examples in Sall., Liv., and other authors see KühnerStegmann, i 514. "in contione" is constantly used in pre-class. and
class. writers.
nec eventus defuit: eventus is used at times in the Latin of this
period for "a successful result"; cf. Iul. 20, 5, desperans tam praecipitis
consilii eventum: Tac. A. ii 26, satis iam eventuum, satis casuum: Plin.
Εp. v 20, egi ego pro Vareno non sine eventu.
Tegeae: Tegea (mod. Paleo-Episkopi) in Arcadia was one of the
oldest towns in the Peloponnesus. It possessed a famous temple of Athena
Alea, described by Pausanias (viii 45). Strabo (fl. 25 B.C.) says that
while the other well-known towns of Arcadia had perished, leaving scarcely
a trace behind, Tegea was still in a tolerable state of preservation: viii 388,
Τεγέα δ᾽ ἔτι μετρίως συμμένει, καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν τῆς ᾿Αλέας ᾿Αθηνᾶς.
CHAPTER 8.
reversus: on his voyage from Alexandria Vespasian visited Rhodes
and several cities in Asia Minor. He crossed from Ionia to Greece
and then from Corcyra to the Iapygian promontory on the Tarentine Gulf,
and was warmly welcomed by the Italian cities and by the capital. Cf.
Joseph. Bell. Iud. vii 2, 4. He did not arrive at Rome before September,
70 A.D.
acto de Iudaeis triumpho: it was not till June, 71 A.D., that this
triumph was celebrated. The senate had decreed separate triumphs to
Vespasian and Titus; Vespasian decided that one should suffice, and for
the first time in its history Rome saw a father and son triumphing together (cf. Tit. 6, 1: Dom. 2, 1). The triumph as described by Josephus
(vii 5, 4) was of unparalleled splendour (magnificus triumphus, Oros. vii
9, 8). Vespasian was weary of the pompous ceremony before its close,
and chided himself for his folly in wanting a triumph at his age; see c. 12.
addidit: Vespasian's first consulship was in
51 A.D. under Claudius, when he was consul suffectus for the last two
months of the year. He held the office for the second time in 70 along
with Titus, the senate bestowing it by decree (Tac. H. iv 3, 38); again
in 71 with Nerva, and in 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79 with Titus (cf. Tit. 6, 1).
consulatus octo
censuram: Vespasian and Titus assumed the censorship in 73, probably in April. For the epigraphic evidence of this see Newton (op. cit.
p. 28 sqq.) and Weynand (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2'655). According to
Censorinus (de die natali 18, 14) the lustrum which closed the censorship
took place in 74; but in spite of the lustrum conditum, the title of
"Censor" is frequently given as an honorary title to Vespasian and
Titus in inscriptions in the following years. Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 350,
n. 3) shows that in Plin. N.H. vii 162, census quem intra quadriennium
imperatores Caesares Vespasiani pater filiusque censores egerunt, the words
intra quadriennium have been usually misinterpreted as meaning "during
four years (71-74)," whereas the real meaning is "four years ago," i.e.
four years before the date at which Pliny was writing.
nihil habuit antiquius: cf. Vitell. 15, 3, iuravit.. nihil sibi antiquius
quiete publica fore: Claud. 11, 1, nihil antiquius duxit quam id biduum
..
memoriae eximere. The phrase aliquid (or nihil) antiquius habere, used
at all periods of Lat., is exactly the Gr. πρεσβύτερόν τι (οr οὐδὲν) ἔχειν.
§ 2. ignominiae: the “humiliating defeat" of the Vitellians at
Betriacum (or Cremona, see c. 7, 1). For this sense of “ignominia’” cf.
Oth. 9, 3, ne victis quidem adeo afflictis ut non in ultionem ignominiae
quidvis discriminis
subirent: Ner. 39, 1, ignominia ad Orientem legionibus in Armenia sub iugum missis: Aug. 23, graves ignominias cladesque
duas accepit.
civitates liberae: these free states or cities "although geographically,
were not juristically within a province at all" (Greenidge, Roman Public
Life p. 317). Under the Republic they were free from Roman taxation
and enjoyed complete autonomy. They were outside the jurisdiction of
the governor, who could only enter a civitas libera as its guest. Under
the Empire, however, their libertas no longer conferred immunity from
Roman taxation (Greenidge, p. 428; cf. Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 654 sqq.,
Marquardt, Staatsv. i² 71 sqq.).
nec non et see on Tit. 5, 2.
regna: client kingdoms on the frontiers of the Empire (such as
Commagene, mentioned below in § 4), ruled by kings in alliance with Rome
(reges socii), each bound by terms of his special treaty (valid only during
his lifetime), but all under an obligation to furnish troops if required.
Vitellianorum . . exauctoravit plurimos: exauctorare (= ab auctoramento, id est obligatione militari, et iuramento solvere) was at times used
of an honorable discharge (see on "missio,” Vitell. 15, 1), but more often
of a summary and dishonorable dismissal (cf. Vitell. 10, 1). Tacitus
(H. iv 46) describes the steps taken by Mucianus, before Vespasian's
arrival at Rome, to reinstate the praetorians who had been dismissed by
Vitellius and had then sided with Vespasian, and to get rid of the 16
praetorian cohorts formed by Vitellius from the Germanic legions. These
cohorts could not safely be disbanded all at once, and Mucianus was
forced to proceed very gradually: quibus aetas et iusta stipendia, dimissi
cum honore, alii ob culpam, sed carptim ac singuli. Vespasian restored the
old number of 9 praetorian cohorts. The legions with which Vespasian
dealt drastically were those of which merely detachments had fought for
Vitellius at the second battle of Betriacum (Vitell. 15, 2, n.), but of
which the main body had remained in Germany and taken part in the
revolt of Civilis (69-70 A.D., see Tac. H. iv 12 sqq.; not mentioned by
Suet.). Three of them (i Germanica, iv Macedonica, xvi Gallica) were disbanded; apparently also xv Primigenia which surrendered to Civilis at
Castra Vetera (H. iv 23, 60) and is not mentioned after 70 A.D. (see Dessau
Inscr. 2275 n.). It is a disputed point whether v Alaudae was disbanded
by Vespasian or was annihilated either in 86 by the Dacians or in 92 by
the Sarmatians (Dom. '6, 1). See the articles "Legio" by Cagnat in
Daremberg-Saglio and by Ritterling in Pauly-Wissowa; also Parker, The
Roman Legions, 107 sqq.
adeo nihil.. indulsit: the only special payment which we know was
made to Vespasian's victorious soldiers was one by Mucianus of 100
sesterces each (Dio lxv 22). Vespasian had resolutely refused to promise
the usual lavish donativa (see on Dom. 2, 3); cf. Tac. H. ii 82, donativum
militi neque Mucianus
nisi modice ostenderat, ne Vespasianus quidem
plus civili bello obtulit quam alii in pace, egregie firmus adversus militarem
largitionem eoque exercitu meliore. For adeo nihil
ut (= tantum
abest ut .., ut) cf. c. 12 adeo nihil appetivit, ut; it occurs from Livy
on (Hand Tursell. i 141).
legitima praemia: praemia is frequently used by Suetonius for the
bounties (commoda, see on Vitell. 15, 1) to which time-expired soldiers
were entitled on their discharge; cf. Iul. 70, missionem et praemia flagitantes: Aug. 15, promissa veteranis praemia: ib. 49, 2, quicquid ubique
militum esset, ad certam stipendiorum (i.e. service-time) praemiorumque
formulam astrinxit. So‘commoda praemiorum” in Aug. 24, 1: (legiones)
immodeste missionem postulantes citra ("without") commoda emeritorum
praemiorum exauctoravit.
§ 3. fragrantem unguento: fragrare is a poetic word, not found earlier
in prose (see Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb.); it is used either with the abl.
as here (cf. Catull. 6, 8) or with the acc. (e.g. Apul. Met. vi 11, Venus
balsama fragrans).
praefectura: the command of an ala or squadron of auxiliary cavalry
(see on Galb. 10, 2), one of the posts held by a young Roman qualifying
in the army with a view to obtaining office at Rome and admission to
the senate; cf. Aug. 38, 2, liberis senatorum
militiam auspicantibus
non tribunatum modo legionum, sed et praefecturas alarum dedit; ac ne
qui expers castrorum esset, binos plerumque laticlavios praeposuit singulis
alis.
nutu aspernatus: “aspernari est averti, non solum corpore, sed etiam
animo” (Donat. on Ter. Phorm. 371). nutus is used here of drawing
back or tossing back the head in disgust; cf. nutare in Plaut. Mil. 208,
capite nutat: non placet quod repperit, where Ussing comments “non
adnuens, sed renuens, nutu aspernatus, ut ait Sueton.”
alium oboluisses: so in Plaut. Most. 39, oboluisti alium. The acc.
was freely used with olere and its compounds; e.g. Varr. Men. 63, alium
ac caepe olere: Cic. Phil. ii 63, redolere vinum (Kühner-Stegmann, i 277).
alium “garlic survives in the Romance languages: Ital. aglio, Fr. ail,
Span. ajo. On the forms alium and allium (given here by QR) Vollmer
(Thes. Ling. Lat.) says: “proba scriptura est ‘alium' firmata titulo
Pompeiano Corp. iv 2070 et codicibus melioribus (ut Ambr. Plaut.
Poen. 1314 ali[i] ); tamen iam primo post Chr. saeculo scribebant
“allium” (Inscr. Pompei. p. 1620, 15) quae scriptio fere regnat apud librarios
recentiores."
=
litteras: "letters patent,” “commission," dati officii codicillos
(Claud. 29, 1, suppositos aut etiam palam immutatos datorum officiorum
codicillos). For "litterae" used of official ordinances cf. Cic. Verr. v 56,
cedo mihi eiusdem praetoris litteras et rerum decretarum et frumenti
imperati.
revocavit: revocare in the sense of rescindere is not used in class.
prose; it occurs in Sen., Tac., etc.
classiarios ab Ostia et Puteolis: Ostia (at the mouth of the Tiber,
16 miles from Rome) and Puteoli (on the coast of Campania) were two
of the squadron-stations of the main Roman fleet at Misenum. In Claud.
25, 2 Suetonius mentions that Claudius stationed cohorts at Ostia and
Puteoli to guard against the danger of fires (Puteolis et Ostiae singulas
cohortes ad arcendos incendiorum casus collocavit). It is not definitely known
whether those cohorts consisted of classiarii “marines” (so Daremberg-Saglio, i 1222), or were two of the cohortes urbanae (so Smilda ad loc.,
following Mommsen, Hermes xvi 645). See also on Oth. 8, 2.
calciarii: sc. argenti "shoe-money"; cf. Digest ii 15, 8, 14, de
calciario quoque arbitrio praetoris transigendum est: xxxiv 1, 21, neque
vestiarium neque calciarium deberi palam est. Similarly clavarium “shoenail-money," Тас. Н. iii 50, seditiosae militum voces .. clavarium (donativi
nomen est) flagitantium. See Parker, Rom. Legions 223.
nomine: see on c. 4, 3.
quasi parum esset: cf. Calig. 29, 1, Monenti Antoniae aviae tamquam
parum esset non oboedire: “Memento,” ait, “omnia mihi et in omnes
licere.'"
excalciatos: here, as in other writers, excalciare has a personal object;
contrast Vitell. 2, 5, petit ut sibi pedes praeberet excalciandos. Varro (ap.
Non. 478 M.) has excalciari as a deponent: ad Herculis, ut introeat, nemo
se excalciatur. Suetonius also uses discalciatus "unshod" "barefooted"
(Ner. 51).
cursitare: these classiarii seem to have been used as couriers (cursores);
see Hirschfeld, Kaiserl. Verwaltungsb.2 228, 3.
§ 4. Achaiam: Augustus assigned the province of Achaia to the
senate and it was governed by a proconsul (Dio liii 12). In 16 A.D. Tiberius
made it an imperial province (Tac. A. i 76), but Claudius gave it back
to the senate (Claud. 25). Nero abolished the province and proclaimed
the freedom of the Greeks at the Isthmian Games in 67 (Ner. 24: Plut.
Flamin. 12: Dio lxiii 11). Vespasian declared the Greeks incapable of
freedom and restored the senatorial province with a yearly tribute (Paus.
vii 17).
Lyciam: the cities-league of Lycia (Λυκίων τὸ κοινόν) was a civitas libera
et foederata from the Sullan period on. It suffered much under Cassius
in 43 B.C., but its freedom was recognised a second time by M. Antonius
and it continued to enjoy it till 43 A.D. when Claudius took it away
(Claud. 25, Lyciis ob exitiabiles inter se discordias libertatem ademit).
Dio (lx 17) says that Claudius added Lycia to the praefectura of
Pamphylia, but from the evidence available it seems to have been first
formed into a province along with Pamphylia under Vespasian in 74. They
formed an imperial province under the governorship of a praetorius legatus
Augusti pro praetore. See Marquardt, Staatsv. i² 374 sqq.
Rhodum: Rhodes had been made a civitas foederata for its staunch
support of Rome in the Macedonian and Mithridatic wars (Appian Bell.
Civ. iv 66 sqq.). It lost its freedom in 44 A.D. for crucifying some Roman
citizens (Dio lx 24), but recovered it in 53, Nero pleading its cause before
Claudius (Suet. Claud. 25 libertatem Rhodiis ob paenitentiam veterum
delictorum reddidit: Tac. A. xii 58, reddita Rhodiis libertas, adempta
saepe aut firmata, prout bellis externis meruerant aut domi seditione
deliquerant). Presumably Rhodes and Samos (see below) were brought
into the province of Asia by Vespasian. Marquardt (op. cit. 348) points
out that this was the origin of the mistaken statement in Sextus Rufus
Brev. 10, sub Vespasiano principe Insularum provincia facta est. The
Insularum provincia, ἐπαρχία νήσων (κυκλάδων), is first mentioned in the
reign of Diocletian, 284-305 A.D. (C.I.L. iii 450).
Byzantium: Byzantium became a civitas foederata as a reward for
its services to Rome in the war with the pseudo-Philip of Macedon (c.
150 в.с.). Later it became a civitas libera with freedom revocable by
Rome at pleasure, whereas the freedom of a civitas foederata was guaranteed
by a definite foedus. In Cic. Prov. Cons, 4, 6 it is mentioned as a civitas
libera which had been outrageously plundered by the proconsul L. Piso.
In the time of Claudius it was no longer immunis, for envoys appeared
before the senate in 53 A.D. asking for relief, and Claudius helped them
to secure a remission of tribute for 5 years on account of their losses in
recent Thracian wars (Tac. A. xii 62). Pliny, N.H. iv 11, speaks of it as
an oppidum liberae condicionis, but Vespasian took away its freedom.
For its relation to the province of Macedonia, and later to that of Bithynia,
where the younger Pliny was governor, see Hardy on Plin. Ep. x 43.
Samum: the island of Samos was united to the province of Asia in
84 B.C. Augustus wintered at Samos in 20-19 в.с. and bestowed freedom
on the islanders as a reward for their hospitality (Dio liv 7, 9). It is
mentioned as a free state in Plin. N.H. v 37 (Pliny's work was dedicated
to Titus in 77 A.D.).
Trachiam Ciliciam: the reading of all the better MSS. is thraciam,
which was corrected by Turnebus to Tracheam and by Bentley to Trachiam
(found in Ⅱ), both these forms representing the Gr. Τραχεῖαν, and the
adoption of either correction is necessary. Thraciam (retained by Roth
and Preud'homme) is meaningless, for Thrace had been already made a
province under a procurator in 46 A.D., and only Cilicia Trachia, not
Cilicia generally, could be described in the words of Suet. “dicionis regiae
usque ad id tempus.” The mountainous western part of Cilicia was known
as τραχεῖα aspera, the eastern plainland as πεδιάς campestris, the boundary
being the city of Soli. When the province of Cilicia (first constituted in
102 B.C.) was re-organised in 64 B.c., the mountainous parts were left to
tributary native princes. M. Antonius gave Cilicia Trachia to Cleopatra
in 36 B.C. Later it was held by Amyntas, king of Galatia. On his death
in 25 B.c. it was given by Augustus to Archelaus of Cappadocia and after
his death in 17 A.D., when Cappadocia became a province, his family seem
to have remained in possession of Cilicia Trachia until Caligula gave it
along with Commagene to Antiochus IV (Dio lix 8). Caligula later deposed
Antiochus, but Claudius restored him (Dio lx 8) and he ruled Cilicia
Trachia until Vespasian finally attached it to the province of Cilicia in 74.
See Marquardt, op. cit. i² 313, who points out that the same confusion of
Trachia and Thracia occurs in the repetition of the words of Suet. by
Eutrop. (vii 19), Aur. Vict. (Epit. 9), and Hieron. (Eusebii Chron. p. 159
Schoene).
Commagenen: this district lay between Cappadocia on the N. and
Syria on the S.; it was bounded on the E. by the Euphrates, and on the
W. by Cilicia. For over a hundred years it had its own kings connected
with the family of the Seleucidae in Syria. In 17 A.D., on the death of
Antiochus III, it was made a Roman province by Tiberius, but was given
back by Caligula in 38 to Antiochus IV, a son of the late king. In 72
the governor of Syria deposed him, by command of Vespasian, for
intriguing with Parthia, and Commagene was made part of the province
of Syria; its capital Samosata received the additional name of Flavia.
in provinciarum formam redegit: cf. Eutrop. vii 19; Aur. Vict.
Caes. 9, Epit. 9; Oros. vii 9. Similar punishments by deprivation of
freedom were inflicted by Augustus (Aug. 47, urbium quasdam foederatas
sed ad exitium licentia praecipites libertate privavit, these cities being
Cyzicus, which was shortly after reinstated, Tyre, and Sidon); by Tiberius
on Cyzicus (Tib. 37); by Claudius on Rhodes and Lycia (Claud. 25); by
Septimius Severus in 196 on Byzantium, which must have recovered the
freedom taken from it by Vespasian (Dio lxxiv 14). For the technical
expression in formam provinciae redigere” to denote the subjection of
a community to Rome by placing it under a Roman governor see Mommsen,
Staatsr. iii 1166.
Cappadociae: in 15 A.D. Tiberius, out of pique for a want of respect
shown to him when staying at Rhodes, treacherously invited Archelaus,
king of Cappadocia, to Rome and kept him there till his death in 17, when
his kingdom was made a Roman province (Tac. A. ii 42, 56; Dio lvii 17;
Strab. xii 534). From that time on it was governed by procurators (Tac.
A. xii 49) until Vespasian gave it a consular governor with a legionary
force. The evidence of inscriptions shows that Vespasian joined Cappadocia
(with Lesser Armenia, etc.) to Galatia in one vast administrative sphere,
and that this arrangement continued till the later years of Trajan, who
made Galatia and Cappadocia separate provinces with separate governors.
See Brandis in Pauly-Wissowa vii 552; Henderson, Five Rom. Emperors
p. 60.
legiones addidit: cf. Tac. H. ii 81, inermes legati regebant (the
Asiatic provinces in 69) nondum additis Cappadociae legionibus. One of
the legions was the 12th Fulminata, and the other (as von Domaszewski
suggests) was probably the 16th Flavia, a new legion organised by Vesp.
in place of the disbanded 16th Gallica. Josephus (Bell. Iud. vii 1, 3) says
the 12th legion was sent to Melitene in Cappadocia late in 70, so the
consular legatus must have been appointed by that time (Marquardt, p. 367).
pro eq. R.: Dio (lvii 17) mentions that Tiberius gave the administration of Cappadocia to an eques: κακ τούτου (i.e. from 17 A.D.) ἡ Καππαδοκία τῶν τε ῾Ρωμαίων ἐγένετο καὶ ἱππεῖ ἐπετράπη. Such personal agents of
Caesar (procuratores Caesaris pro legato) governed the less important
outlying districts which were reckoned under the imperial provinces.
§ 5. deformis urbs: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, Romam deformem incendiis
veteribus ac ruinis, permissa, si domini deessent, volentibus aedificandi
copia, Capitolium, aedem Pacis, Claudii monumenta reparavit multaque nova
instituit. In addition to his restorations and constructions of buildings
in Rome, Vespasian repaired at his own expense the streets which were in
a sorry condition; cf. the senate's decree of thanks in the latter part of
71 (C.I.L. vi 931, Newton 113): Imp. Caesari Vespasiano Aug., pont.
max., tr. pot. iii, imp. iix, p.p., cos. iii, des. iiii, s.c., quod vias urbis neglegentia superior. tempor. corruptas inpensa sua restituit.
incendiis: the great fire at Rome in '64 A.D., which Suetonius (Ner. 38)
attributes to Nero himself, and the burning of the Capitol by the Vitellians
(see Vitell. 15, 3).
2E
..
sine
vacuas areas aedificare: area meant a vacant space (cf. Paul. Fest.
11, area proprie dicitur locus vacuus: Digest 1 16, 211, locus
aedificio in urbe area, rure ager appellatur), and so a building-site; e.g.
Iul. 26, 2, Forum . . incohavit, cuius area super sestertium milies constitit :
Hor. Ep. i 10, 13, ponendaeque domo quaerenda est area primum. For
aedificare with acc. of the site cf. Varro L.L. v 147, aedificatus locus:
Liv. i 35, 10, privatis aedificanda divisa sunt loca. In Digest xli 4, 13,
aream emit et aedificare coepit, most probably aedificare is to be taken
absolutely, as it may be in our passage.
cuicumque: see on Galb. 4, 3.
..
ipse restitutionem adgressus: the same account is given in Dio
lxvi 10, τόν τε νεὼν τὸν ἐν τῷ Καπιτωλίῳ εὐθὺς οἰκοδομεῖν ἤρξατο, αὐτός τε τοῦ χοῦ
πρῶτος ἐκφορήσας, καὶ δηλονότι καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτοις τὸ αὐτὸ τοῦτο
κελεύσας, ἵνα καὶ τῷ λοιπῷ πλήθει ἀπαραίτητον τὸ διακόνημα γένηται. The difficulty
is that Vesp. did not arrive in Italy and Rome till the late summer of 70,
and Tacitus (who was probably an eyewitness) in describing the ceremonies
at the dedication of the site and the laying of the foundation-stone of
the new temple on June 21 does not mention the emperor as taking part,
but says that he commissioned Vestinus to supervise the work: H. iv 53,
curam restituendi Capitolii in Lucium Vestinum confert, equestris ordinis
virum, sed auctoritate famaque inter proceres. Weynand (Pauly-Wissowa,
vi 2648) tries to get over the difficulty by assuming that Vesp., when he
arrived later at Rome, helped to clear away the débris.
ruderibus: rubbish from the buildings which had been destroyed by
fire; cf. Aug. 30, 1, alveum Tiberis laxavit ac repurgavit, completum olim
ruderibus et aedificiorum prolationibus (‘extensions") coartatum: Ner. 38,
3 (of Nero after the great fire at Rome), pollicitus cadaverum et ruderum
gratuitam egestionem: Tac. A. xv 43 (referring to the same), ruderi
accipiendo Ostienses paludes destinabat, utique naves, quae frumentum
Tiberi subvectavissent, onustae rudere decurrerent. The more usual
meaning of rudus is a kind of concrete made from broken stones mixed
with lime and used for building purposes.
manus primus admovit: similarly Nero, to stimulate the praetorians
at the attempt to dig through the Isthmus of Corinth, ‘primus rastello
('mattock') humum effodit et corbulae ('basket') congestam umeris
extulit” (Ner. 19, 2). Germanicus, at the construction of a mound over
the bones of the legions of Varus, "primum extruendo tumulo caespitem
posuit'' (Tac. A. i 62).
suo collo: cf. Apul. Met. ix 7, calamitosus faber collo suo gerens
dolium: Luc. i 603, Salius laeto portans ancilia collo: Catull. 10, 23,
fractum qui veteris pedem grabati | in collo sibi collocare posset.
aerearum tabularum: all engagements entered into by Rome with
foreigners, whether international treaties or privileges conferred on individuals, were engraved on bronze tablets and affixed to the walls of
public buildings and temples, more especially in the immediate neighbourhood of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. Polybius (iii 26) saw the old
trade treaties between Rome and Carthage ἐν χαλκώμασι παρὰ τὸν Δία τὸν
Καπετώλιον ἐν τῷ τῶν ἀγορανόμων ταμιείῳ (‘"the archives of the aediles'').
Cf. also Appian Syr. 39 (on the treaty with Antiochus in 189 в.с.), ταῦτα
συγγραψάμενοί τε καὶ ἐς τὸ Καπιτώλιον ἐς δέλτους χαλκᾶς ἀναθέντες, οὗ καὶ τὰς
ἄλλας συνθήκας ἀνατιθέασιν : Cic. Phil. ii 36, toto Capitolio tabulae figebantur,
neque solum singulis venibant immunitates, sed etiam populis universis;
civitas non iam singillatim, sed provinciis totis dabatur unum egregium
de rege Deiotaro, populi R. amicissimo, decretum in Capitolio fixum. See
Mommsen, Staatsr. i3 257; Jordan, Topogr. Rom i 2, 52. Tacitus (H. iv
40) says that the senate before the arrival of Vesp. had appointed a
commission “qui aera legum vetustate delapsa noscerent figerentque." It
is uncertain whether this was another version of what Suet. says, or
whether Vesp. supplemented the labours of this commission (see Spooner
ad loc.).
undique investigatis exemplaribus: cf. Dom. 20, exemplaribus undique
petitis (when Domitian was restoring the libraries consumed by fire at
Rome). The copies (exemplaria) used by Vespasian were such as are
mentioned in Liv. xxvi 24, 14, haec convenerunt conscriptaque biennio
post Olympiae ab Aetolis, in Capitolio ab Romanis, ut testata sacris monumentis essent, sunt posita: C.I.G. 2485 (an alliance between Rome and
Astypalaea in 105 B.c., a copy of which was to be preserved on bronze at
the temple of Athena in Astypalaea).
instrumentum: in apposition with aerearum
milia. The word is
used here of an official record; cf. Calig. 8, 5, sequenda est publici instrumenti (i.e. the acta publica or acta diurna) auctoritas: Quintil. xii 8, 12,
opus est intueri omne litis instrumentum (i.e. every document connected
with the case): Digest xxiv 1, 58, emptionum instrumenta suo nomine
confecit. Lawyers use "instrument" for a writing acknowledging or
certifying to a claim, or recording the terms of a contract, deed, or grant.
senatus consulta: e.g. the decree (78 B.c.) granting friendship and
privileges to Asclepiades of Clazomenae, Polystratus of Carystus, and
Meniscus of Miletus, three naval captains who had rendered services to
Rome in 90-89 during the Italian revolt (C.I.L. i 203; Bruns, Fontes Iuris
Rom. p. 176; Wordsworth, Frag. and Spec. p. 205). A similar grant of
privileges was decreed by the senate to Onesimus a Macedonian for services
rendered by his father to Rome in the war against Perseus (Liv. xliv 16).
As M has the reading consultam, Bentley would insert ac (or et) after
consulta.
plebi scita: e.g. the Lex Antonia de Termessibus (71 B.c.) confirming
the autonomy granted to Termessus, a town in Pisidia (C.I.L. i 204; Bruns,
p. 92; Wordsworth, p. 209). This measure was introduced by the tribune
C. Antonius “de s(enatus) s(ententia)," i.e. with the sanction of the
senate, in accordance with Sulla's ordinance (88 B.c.) requiring such sanction
for any measure brought before the plebeian assembly; but in 70 B.C. the
Lex Pompeia restored the unrestricted legislative validity secured for plebi
scita by the Lex Hortensia in 287.
=
privilegio: in class. Lat. privilegium meant a special ordinance, an
exceptional measure in favour of or directed against an individual (privus
singulus), which in Republican times was illegal. It was under the Caesars
that the word first acquired the sense of a prerogative or "privilege”
granted by a special ordinance; class. writers express this by beneficium,
ius praecipuum, etc. (Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb.).
cuicumque: see on Galb. 4, 3.
2E2
CHAPTER 9.
nova opera: the inscriptions bearing on the building activity of the
reigns of Vespasian and Titus, not merely in Rome but also in Italy and
the provinces, are collected by Newton, op. cit. 46 sqq. Among these inscriptions are C.I.L. iii 6702, 11194-11196; vi 301, 369, 814, 934 (where
Vesp. is described as restitutor aedium sacrarum), 935, 936, 939, 940 (where
there is mention of a collegium subrutorum whose work, according to
Mommsen, ad loc., was to dig out the ruins of buildings destroyed by fire,
etc.); x 1406, 1481; xi 598; xiv 3485.
templum Pacis: cf. Dio lxvi 15, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ ἕκτον καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ
Τίτου τέταρτον ἀρχόντων (75 A.D.) τὸ τῆς Εἰρήνης τέμενος καθιερώθη : Aur.
Vict. Caes. 9, Romae Capitolium, quod conflagravisse supra memoravimus,
aedes Pacis, Claudii monumenta, amphitheatri tanta vis multaque alia ac
forum coepta seu patrata. Josephus (Bell. Iud. vii 5) says of the building
of this temple: “ταχὺ δὲ δὴ μάλα, καὶ πάσης ἀνθρωπίνης κρεῖττον ἐπινοίας
ἐτετελείωτο,” and describes its ornaments which included vessels of gold
and silver from the Temple in Jerusalem. Pliny (N.H. xxxvi 102) ranks it
among the "pulcherrima operum quae umquam vidit orbis," and mentions
several famous statues and pictures in it (xxxiv 84, xxxv 74, 109, 122).
Domitian may have added some finishing touches to it, and he seems, in
characteristic fashion (see Dom. 5), to have claimed the credit for the
whole, which is given to him by the court poet Statius (Silv. iv 3, 17, qui
Pacem propria domo reponit). The temple was burned down shortly
before the death of Commodus (192 A.D.), but was soon restored. It seems
to have been reduced to ruins by an earthquake in 408 A.D. Newton
(p. 46, n. 7) points out that no inscription of this temple has been found,
but no divinity was so frequently inserted by Vespasian on his coins as
Pax (see Eckhel, vi p. 334) and there are several dedications to the "Pax
Vespasiani'' in inscriptions, e.g. C.I.L. vi 200, Paci aeternae domus Imp.
Vespasiani Caesaris Aug. liberorumq. eius sacrum.
Foro: the Forum Romanum, to the N. of which the temple stood.
The temple was built in an enclosed space, like the temple of Venus
Genetrix in Caesar's forum and that of Mars Ultor in the forum of
Augustus, and in the period after Constantine we find this space called
forum Pacis (φόρον Εἰρήνης), e.g. in Amm. Marc. xvi 10, Procop. Bell. Goth. iv
21. Domitian connected the forum Augusti with the templum Pacis or
forum Pacis by the forum Transitorium (see Dom. 5).
(templum) Divi Claudi: cf. Claud. 45, funeratus est sollemni principum
pompa et in numerum deorum relatus; quem honorem a Nerone destitutum
("neglected") abolitumque recepit mox per Vespasianum. A portico surrounding it is probably that mentioned in Mart. Spect. 2, 9: Claudia
diffusas ubi porticus explicat umbras | ultima pars aulae deficientis erat
(i.e. the end of the Golden House of Nero was on this part of the Caelian
mount). The temple is mentioned by Frontinus, de Aquaed. 20, 76, in
connexion with the Aqua Claudia; also in C.I.L. vi 10251 a, T. Flavio Aug.
lib. Trophimo constitutori collegi numinis dominorum quod est sup templo
divi Claudi. There are still remains, not of the temple, but of the massive
substructions; see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Rom i 3, 232: Burn, Rome
and the Campagna p. 221.
Caelio monte: between the Aventine and Esquiline, now the Lateran
Mount; originally called Mons Querquetulanus from the oak-trees on it,
it received the name Caelius from the Etruscan chief Caeles Vibenna
(Etrusc. Kaile Fipne); under Tiberius the name was changed for a short
time to Mons Augustus to commemorate the munificence of Tiberius in
restoring it when devastated by fire (Suet. Tib. 48, Tac. A. iv 64).
the Caelian were chapels of Dea Carna (Macrob. Sat. i 12), Minerva Capta
(Ov. F. iii 837), and Diana (Cic. Har. Resp. 15); also a temple of Isis
(Trebell. Poll. trig. tyrann. 24).
Agrippina: see on c. 4, 2.
On
a Nerone prope funditus destructum: Platner-Ashby (Topogr. Dict.
Rome p. 120) would account for this destruction partly by the construction
of the distributing station of the Aqua Claudia, which Nero extended to
the Caelian, and partly by the construction of the Domus Aurea.
amphitheatrum: the vast Flavian amphitheatre, known as the
Colosseum since about 1000 A.D. (Platner-Ashby, p. 6), was built in the
valley between the Esquiline and Caelian on the site of the stagnum
Neronis, i.e. the great pleasure lake of Nero's Golden House; cf. Mart.
Spect. 2, 5, Hic ubi conspicui venerabilis amphitheatri | erigitur moles,
stagna Neronis erant. It was begun by Vespasian in 72, continued and
dedicated by Titus in 80, and completed by Domitian in 823; further
additions were made by Alexander Severus (ob. 235) and Gordianus (ob.
238). The building was about a third of a mile in circumference, and
could accommodate over 50,000 spectators. The magnificent remains attest
the truth of Martial's lines (Spect. 1, 7): Omnis Caesareo cedit labor
amphitheatro, | unum pro cunctis fama loquetur opus. See Jordan-Huelsen,
op. cit. i 3, 282 sqq. Coins of Vesp. and Titus which depict the Flavian
amphitheatre under different aspects are described by Eckhel, vi pp. 357-
359, 375, vii 271, 315; Cohen, i² p. 461, etc.
ut destinasse compererat Augustum: we do not read elsewhere of this
design of Augustus to build an amphitheatre in the heart of the city.
The first stone amphitheatre was constructed by Statilius Taurus in the
reign of Augustus (29 B.C.; cf. Suet. Aug. 29, Tac. A. iii 72, Dio li 23).
It was in the Campus Martius. In the record of his reign contained in
the Monumentum Ancyranum Augustus says (c. 22): Venationes bestiarum
Africanarum meo nomine aut filiorum meorum et nepotum in circo aut in
foro aut in amphitheatris populo dedi sexiens et viciens. Mommsen, Mon.
Anc.² 94, commenting on the pl. amphitheatris, says that the word, first
found here, was originally a plural “cum essent amphitheatra tanquam
theatra duo," and that Aug. is referring only to the new amphitheatre
of Taurus and not to other temporary wooden structures. But more
probably amphitheatrum meant a building in which the θέατρον (i.e. the
space for spectators, Zuschauerraum) ran round in a ring; see Meier in
Pauly-Wissowa, i 1959.
§ 2. amplissimos ordines: the ordo senatorius and ordo equester. The
title amplissimus ordo was applied especially to the senate (see on c. 2, 3),
but Cicero had already used amplissimi ordines to include senatores, equites,
and tribuni aerarii, from all of whom the iudices were drawn at the time
(e.g. Sull. 5, 15: Mil. 2, 4, where see Clark's note). Lipsius needlessly
proposed to alter amplissimos to amplissimum, attaching it to the preceding sentence as an epithet of amphitheatrum, and Casaubon would
either accept this change or read ambos ordines.
purgavit: a precedent for this "purgation" was that effected by
Augustus; cf. Aug. 35, 1, Senatorum affluentem numerum deformi et incondita turba - erant enim super mille, et quidem indignissimi et post
necem Caesaris per gratiam et praemium adlecti, quos orcinos (i.e. slaves
set free by their master's will) vulgus vocabat - ad modum pristinum et
splendorem redegit duabus lectionibus (these two lectiones or “revisions"
were in 29 and 18 в.с.).
supplevit: Aur. Vict. (Caes. 9) says that there were barely 200 gentes
when Vesp. came to the throne, and that he raised the number to 1000:
censu more veterum exercito, senatu motus probrosior quisque, ac lectis
undique optimis viris, mille gentes compositae, cum ducentas aegerrime
repperisset, exstinctis saevitia tyrannorum plerisque.
recenso equite: Augustus established an annual probatio equitum
(ἐξέτασις τῶν ἱππέων, Dio lv 31) combining the old annual travectio, or
parade of those equites who had the equus publicus, and the recognitio
equitum which had been held periodically by the censors. Before the
parade, the emperor aided by ten senators held a strict investigation into
the life of each of the equites and those who were proved unworthy were
either degraded or reprimanded with varying degrees of severity; see
Aug. 38 and 39 with Shuckburgh's notes. Suetonius also mentions the
recognitio equitum by Caligula and Claudius: Calig. 16, 2, Equites R.
severe curioseque nec sine moderatione recognovit, palam adempto equo
quibus aut probri aliquid aut ignominiae inesset, eorum qui minore culpa
tenerentur nominibus modo in recitatione praeteritis: Claud. 16, 1,
Recognitione equitum iuvenem probri plenum, sed quem pater probatissimum sibi affirmabat, sine ignominia dimisit, habere dicens censorem
suum, etc.
summotis: in the case of senators movere senatu (or senatorio loco)
was the usual expression for expulsion; cf. Dom. 8, 3.
Tacitus
indignissimis: cf. Aug. 35, 1 (quoted above on purgavit).
tells of Tiberius expelling senators “prodigos et ob flagitia egentes” (A. ii
48, cf. Suet. Vitell. 2, 2) and another "quod in acta d. Augusti non
iuraverat” (A. iv 42). Claudius enforced the resignation of those who
were "famosi probris” (A. xi 25). Domitian expelled an ex-quaestor
“quod gesticulandi saltandique studio teneretur” (Suet. Dom. 8, 3).
Among those expelled by Vespasian was Palfurius Sura; see on Dom. 13, 1.
sed
Italicorum ac provincialium: cf. Tac. A. iii 55, novi homines e типіcipiis et coloniis (terms denoting the towns of Italy) atque etiam provinciis
in senatum crebro adsumpti domesticam parsimoniam intulerunt
praecipuus adstricti moris auctor Vespasianus fuit, antiquo ipse cultu
victuque. Vespasian himself was a novus homo from Reate. Claudius, in
his speech (partly preserved on a bronze tablet at Lugdunum, cf. Tac. A. xi
24) successfully advocating the admission of Gallic senators, says that
Tiberius had freely enrolled senators from Italian towns. The first
Paelignian senator was admitted under Augustus (C.I.L. ix 3306). Julius
c, 9, 2.]
Caesar had introduced some Gallic senators, who were received with bitter
hostility at Rome (Iul. 76, 80). Otho, in 69 A.D., describes the senate as
"caput imperii et decora omnium provinciarum” (Tac. H. i 84). A full
account of the gradual admission of provincials to the senate is given by
Friedlaender, Sitteng. i¹º 107 sqq. In recruiting the equestrian order from
the whole Roman empire Vespasian was following the example of Caligula
of whom Dio (lix 9) says: τοῦ τε τέλους (ordinis) τοῦ τῶν ἱππέων ὀλιγαν -
δροῦντος, τοὺς πρώτους ἐξ ἁπάσης καὶ τῆς ἔξω ἀρχῆς τοῖς τε γένεσι καὶ ταῖς περιουσίαις
μεταπεμψάμενος κατελέξατο. See also on c. 3 supr.
adlecto: legere in senatum was the phrase used under the Republic
of the censors retaining the names of old senators or admitting those newly
qualified; adlectio is the tech. term under the Empire for the admission to
the senate by imperial favour of those not regularly qualified.
These
adlecti were given varying rank among those senators who had been
quaestors, praetors, etc. (adlecti inter quaestorios, aedilicios, tribunicios,
praetorios, and, from the 3rd cent. A.D., consulares). See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii 939 sqq.; Willems, Le Sénat Romain i 626 sqq. Examples of
those who were adlecti inter tribunicios or praetorios by Vespasian and
Titus as censors are to be found in C.I.L. ii 4130, iii 335, vi 1359, viii 7057,
ix 5533 (see Vesp. 13, note on Salvium Liberalem), xi 1834, xiv 2925;
Plin. Ep. i 14. New patricians also were created in their censorship; see
note on Oth. 1, 3, adlectum inter patricios. Among them were Annius
Verus, grandfather of the emperor Marcus Aurelius (Capitol. Marc.
Antonin. Philos. 1), and Agricola (Tac. Agr. 9). Two of the equites
created by Vespasian were Hormus, one of his freedmen (Tac. H. iv 39),
and Claudius (father of Claudius Etruscus, Stat. S. iii 3, 145), a freedman
of Tiberius, who was a rationibus under Nero and still held that post
under Domitian.
remaledici: the compound remaledicere (= ἀντιλοιδορεῖν) is first found
here, and occurs later in Tertull. Idol. 21, Hieron. Ep. 69, 9.
..
civile: conduct befitting a true citizen living on terms of mutual
respect with his fellow-citizens, neither submitting to insults nor insulting
others. civilis (κοινός, δημοκρατικός) is repeatedly used by Suetonius of
rulers who behave unassumingly, avoiding tyrannical arrogance (ὕβρις)
and respecting the rights of those under their authority; e.g. Vesp. 12,
ceteris in rebus civilis ac clemens: Claud. 12, 1, in semet augendo parcus
atque civilis: Tib. 11, 1, genus vitae civile admodum instituit: Tib. 26, 1,
civilem admodum ac paulo minus quam privatum egit: Calig. 3, 2, domi
forisque civilis: Claud. 1, 4, fuisse creditur civilis animi: Dom. 12, 3,
minime civilis animi: Tit. 6, 1, praefecturam praetorii egit aliquanto
incivilius et violentius. So civilitas for moderation, constitutional conduct;
Claud. 35, 1, primis imperii diebus iactator civilitatis :
Aug. 51, 1,
clementiae civilitatisque eius multa et magna documenta sunt. This use
of civilis is not found before the Aug. period (Ov., Liv.). It is frequent
in Tacitus; e.g. in H. iv 3, describing Vespasian's letter to the senate, he
says: ut princeps loquebatur, civilia de se et rei publicae egregia.
CHAPTER 10.
litium series: the very rare pl. series occurs earlier in the same phrase
in Vell. Pat. ii 118, simulantes fictas litium series.
excreverant: excrescere is not found in class. Lat.; Suetonius uses it
in Galb. 21 of a morbid excrescence on the body.
intercapedine: Fest. p. 111 M., intercapedo, tempus interceptum, сит
scilicet mora est ad capiendum. Cf. Aug. 38, 3, post longam intercapedinem
reducto more travectionis: Plin. Εp. iv 9, 11, dicentis calor.. continuatione
servatur, intercapedine et quasi remissione languescit: Cic. Fin. i 18, 61,
in eorum vita nulla est miseriae intercapedo: Cic. Fam. xvi 21, non paenitebat intercapedinem scribendi ("a break in our correspondence") fecisse.
The law courts had been suspended at Rome during the turmoil of civil
strife in 69-70, and the rights of property must have been ruthlessly
ignored in the armed violence which prevailed.
sorte elegit: Tac. H. iv 40, tum sorte ducti per quos redderentur bello
rapta (Tacitus mentions this among the measures passed by the senate
before the return of Vespasian). These special commissioners would be
reciperatores (see on c. 3), and reciperatores were usually chosen by lot by
the praetor urbanus when the case was between cives, by the praetor
peregrinus when the case was between a civis and a peregrinus.
iudicia centumviralia: it is doubtful whether the centumviral court
is to be traced back to Servius Tullius or was established after the time
(?241 B.C.) when the number of tribes was raised to 35. Festus says that
the centumviri were nominated by the praetor, three from each of the
35 tribes. At some time under the early Empire the number was raised
to 180, four panels of 45, each of which might hear separate cases, or two
might sit together, or the whole four in important trials. The decemviri
stlitibus iudicandis seem to have controlled the court; later, ex-quaestors;
and finally Augustus reinstated the decemviri, acting under the superintendence of the praetor, who was styled hastarius or ad hastas, because the
hasta as the symbol of dominium or ownership was planted in the ground
before the place where the court was sitting. The centumviri dealt with
questions of status, inheritance, dominium ex iure Quiritium, iura in re
aliena such as rights of way, usufruct, etc.
They originally sat in the
Forum, but under the Empire in the Basilica Iulia. Most of the speeches
of the younger Pliny were delivered in this court.
vix suffectura aetas: cf. Cod. Iust. iii 1, 13, properandum nobis
visum est, ne lites fiant paene immortales et vitae hominum modum
excedant. Justinian introduced various changes in legal procedure, to
ensure that justice be administered in a reasonable time. Complaints of
the law's delays are frequent in Latin writers. Martial (vii 65) refers to
a case dragging on for 20 years: Lis te bis decimae numerantem frigora
brumae | conterit una tribus, Gargiliane, foris; cf. Juv. xvi 42, Expectandus
erit qui lites incohet annus | totius populi. Sed tum quoque mille ferenda |
taedia, mille morae. Suetonius tells of ordinances of Augustus (Aug. 32),
Claudius (Claud. 23), and Galba (Galb. 14, 3) to increase the number of
days available for legal business. For a discussion of the number of these
dies iudiciarii (opp. to dies feriati) see the article "Actus rerum” in Pauly-Wissowa, i 331 sqq.
ut
extra ordinem diiudicarent: these commissioners were empowered to
take the most pressing cases first, so that each case had not to wait its
turn for a prolonged hearing before the centumviri. For “extra ordinem”
cf. Tac. A. xiii 51, edixit
Romae praetor, per provincias qui pro
praetore aut consule essent iura adversus publicanos extra ordinem redderent: Sen. Ep. 106, 2, dubitavi utrum differrem te an ius tibi extra
ordinem dicerem. A defendant whose case could claim precedence was
called extraordinarius reus (Cic. Fam. viii 8). Under the Roman legal
system of formulae (Vitell. 7, 2, n.) there were certain cases which the
praetor himself decided without sending them to a iudex. In such cases
the praetor was said extra ordinem cognoscere, and the proceedings were
termed extra ordinem cognitiones, iudicia, or actiones. See also on
Dom. 8, 1.
CHAPTER 11.
auctor senatui fuit decernendi: Vespasian frequently attended the
meetings of the senate and consulted them on his proposals; Dio lxvi 10,
ἔς τε τὸ συνέδριον διὰ παντὸς ἐφοίτα καὶ περὶ πάντων αὐτοῖς ἐπεκοίνου. A special
ius referendi (ad senatum) was granted to Augustus in 23 B.C., giving him
the right of making the first relatio at each meeting of the senate (Dio liii
32), and subsequent emperors had the same privilege; cf. the Sc. de imperio
Vespasiani (Bruns, Fontes p. 202), utique ei senatum habere, relationem
facere, remittere, senatus consulta per relationem discessionemque facere
liceat. Later we read of the emperors making 4 or 5 relationes before
the ordinary business of the senate (Mommsen, Staatsr. ii 898). At first
they made them in person, but more usually they sent them in the form of
letters (litterae, epistulae) or speeches (orationes) to be read by the consuls
or quaestors. Sometimes Titus read Vespasian's speeches in the senate;
see Tit. 6, 1.
ut.
ancilla haberetur: Vespasian re-enacted with modifications the
senatus consultum Claudianum which is often mentioned by Roman jurists.
The emperor Claudius got this passed by the senate in 52 A.D.; cf. Tac.
A. xii 53, Inter quae refert ad patres de poena feminarum quae servis
coniungerentur; statuiturque, ut ignaro domino ad id prolapsae in servitute,
sin consensisset pro libertis haberentur. See also Gaius Inst. i 84-91 on
which Poste says: "The Sc. Claudianum introduced some special enactments respecting the intercourse of freewomen with slaves, which, however,
were subsequently abolished. (a) If a freewoman had intercourse with a
slave with the consent of his proprietor she retained her freedom, though
degraded to the class of a freedwoman, but her issue was the slave of the
proprietor. The slavery of this issue was abolished by Hadrian. (b) If
a freewoman persisted in intercourse with the slave of another person
against the will and in spite of the prohibition of the proprietor, after
three denunciations on his part she was awarded to him by the magistrate
as a slave, and her issue, whether born before or after the adjudication,
became slaves of the same person, who also acquired her estate by a species
of universal succession. This terroristic law, which, from the minuteness
with which the details are developed (Paulus 2, 21), appears to have been
often applied, was not abrogated till the time of Justinian, Inst. 3, 12, 1.
(c) If a freeman had intercourse with a slave whom he supposed to be
free, her male children were born into freedom. This relief of error was
abolished by Vespasian as anomalous (inelegans, Gaius § 85)." Vespasian
in this last case declared that the offspring, male or female, should be
slaves and the property of the mother's owner.
filiorum familiarum: a filius- or filia-familias was a male or female
descendant in the power (potestas) of a pater-familias. On the legal
position of filii familiarum see Roby, Rom. Priv. Law i '64 sqq. Their
position was in some respects similar to that of slaves. In law they had
no property; their father might allow them a peculium, but this was like
a slave's peculium which legally was the master's property; cf. Suet.
Tib. 15 (when Tiberius aged 44 was adopted as a son by Augustus in
2 A.D.), Nec quicquam postea pro patre familias egit aut ius, quod amiserat,
ex ulla parte retinuit. Nam neque donavit neque manumisit, ne hereditatem
quidem aut legata percepit ulla aliter quam ut peculio referret accepta
(i.e. to place them to the credit of the peculium which he held with the
permission of Augustus).
exigendi crediti ius: Vespasian was only re-enacting, after the
confusion of the civil wars, a measure of Claudius to stop money-lenders
advancing money to youths on the post-obit system by which either the
capital plus the interest, or the capital, was to be paid up after the
father's death; cf. Tac. A. xi 13, lege lata saevitiam creditorum coercuit
ne in mortem parentum pecunias filiis familiarum faenori darent. The
Roman jurists mention a decree of the senate dealing with a usurer of
this kind named Macedo; cf. Ulp. Dig. xiv 6, 1, Verba senatus consulti
Macedoniani haec sunt: “Cum inter ceteras sceleris causas Macedo, quas
illi natura administrabat, etiam aes alienum adhibuisset, et saepe materiam
peccandi malis moribus praestaret, qui pecuniam, ne quid amplius diceretur,
incertis nominibus (i.e. doubtful payers) crederet: placere, ne cui, qui filio
familias mutuam pecuniam dedisset, etiam post mortem parentis eius, cuius
in potestate fuisset, actio petitioque daretur: ut scirent qui pessimo
exemplo faenerarent, nullius posse filii familias bonum nomen exspectata
patris morte fieri.” (Cf. also Cod. Iust. iv 28). This Sc. Macedonianum
is probably to be identified with that of Vespasian, though some regard
it as that of Claudius; see Bruns, Fontes p. 203. Horace (Sat. i 2, 14)
refers to the lending of money to tirones who had just donned the toga of
manhood: Quinas hic capiti mercedes exsecat atque, | quanto perditior
quisque est, tanto acrius urget; | nomina sectatur modo sumpta veste virili |
sub patribus duris tironum. The Lex Plaetoria (c. 186 B.c.) enacted that
contracts with minores (under 25 years of age) were only legally binding
when entered into in the presence of a curator appointed by the praetor
(Plaut. Rud. 1381, Pseud. 303; Cic. N.D. iii 30, 74: Off. iii 15, 61).
hoc est mortem: Burman, Oudendorp, and others suspect that
these words have got into the text through a gloss on umquam. Lipsius
would omit at least hoc est. See on Dom. 17, 1, quando et quomodo, id est,
lavantemne an cenantem, aggrederentur.
CHAPTER 12.
ceteris in rebus
civilis: cf. Dio lxvi 11, τό τε σύμπαν, τῇ προνοίᾳ
τῶν κοινῶν, αὐτοκράτωρ ἐνομίζετο· ἐς δὲ δὴ τἄλλα πάντα κοινὸς καὶ ἰσοδίαιτός
σφισιν ἦν: Eutrop. vii 19, Romae se in imperio moderatissime gessit. For
civilis see on c. 9, 2.
mediocritatem:
=
conditionem mediocrem vel tenuem (Baumg.-Cr.).
Cf. Tac. A. xiv '60, (vulgus) cui minor sapientia et ex mediocritate fortunae
pauciora pericula sunt, where med. fort. means their humble or insignificant
position. Suetonius uses mediocris frequently, but mediocritas in only one
other passage, Aug. 101, 3, excusata rei familiaris mediocritate, i.e. the
small amount of his property was urged as an excuse.
neque ac: this sequence is very exceptional and only post-classical;
cf. Tac. Agr. 10, Apul. Met. iii 3, x 14. neque (nec)
. que (Tib. 11, 5:
51, 2) is Ciceronian (e.g. Fin. i 48, Lael. 104) but rare. neque (nec)
et is common at all periods. Kühner-Stegmann, ii 48.
..
conantes
originem referre: similarly the flatterers of Pallas,
the notorious freedman of Claudius, said that he was "regibus Arcadiae
ortus," i.e. descended from Pallas the mythical ancestor of Evander (Tac.
A. xii 53). The Julian family traced their line back to Venus (Suet.
Iul. 6); Galba claimed descent from Jupiter and Pasiphaë (Galb. 2); the
Vitellii were said to be sprung from Faunus king of the Aborigines and
a goddess Vitellia (Vitell. 1, 2). The fondness of the Romans for such
mythical pedigrees is fully illustrated by Friedlaender, Sitteng. i¹º 120.
conditores Reatinos: there is no definite tradition of the foundation
of Reate (c. 1, 2, n.), but various legends refer it to a remote antiquity
and connect it with the Aborigines and Pelasgi (Dion. Hal. i 14, 15, ii 49;
Varr. L.L. v 53). See Pauly-Wissowa, I.A. 346.
comitem Herculis: presumably at the time when Hercules passed
through Italy on his return from Spain with the captured oxen of Geryon
(Aen. vii '662, viii 201 sqq.). We do not read elsewhere of any companions
of Hercules on that occasion, nor is there any other mention of the
monument on the Via Salaria. Pitiscus follows Lipsius in assuming that
the flatterers of Vespasian gave to this companion of Hercules the name
of Flavus (Xanthus ?) and included him among the founders of Reate
where Vespasian was born. Two of the great Roman families, the Fabii
and Antonii, claimed to be descended from Hercules. On his return
journey from Spain Hercules himself was said to have founded the cities
of Alesia and Nemausus in Gaul. A cult of Hercules at Reate is mentioned in C.I.L. ix 4672, 4673.
Salaria via: this road ran north-east from Rome to Reate in the
Sabine territory and Asculum in Picenum. It was said to have derived its
name from being the route by which salt was conveyed into the interior
of Italy from the salt-pits near Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber. The
Colline gate of Rome from which it started was earlier known as the
Porta Salaria.
adeo nihil,
..
ut: see on c. 8, 2.
triumphi: his joint triumph with Titus for their victories over the
Jews; see c. 8, 1.
merito se plecti: cf. Phaedr. i 31, 13, merito plectimur: Cic. Off. ii 8,
28, iure igitur plectimur: Nep. Att. 11, qui cavit ne qua in re iure
plecteretur.
senex: Vespasian was born in 9 A.D. (c. 2, 1) and the triumph was
celebrated in June, 71. The fact that he was 60 years of age was taken
into account by him in considering his prospects in a conflict with
Vitellius in 69; cf. Tac. H. ii 74, Vespasianus modo in spem erectus,
aliquando adversa reputabat: quis ille dies foret, quo sexaginta aetatis
annos et duos filios iuvenes bello permitteret?
tribuniciam potestatem: on Dec. 22, 69 A.D. the senate decreed to
Vespasian “cuncta principibus solita" (Tac. H. iv 3) which included the
tribunicia potestas (cf. H. i 47, decernitur Othoni tribunicia potestas et
nomen Augusti et omnes principum honores). The position of the Princeps
seems to have rested on (a) the proconsulare imperium, (b) the tribunicia
potestas, (c) a special law investing him with miscellaneous prerogatives
not given to him by (a) and (b); a large part of the lex de imperio conferring these prerogatives on Vespasian is still extant (C.I.L. vi 930,
Newton 2, Bruns Fontes p. 202, Bury Stud. Rom. Emp. c. ii n. D.). The
tribunicia potestas, granted for life, was formally assumed afresh every
year, and the Princeps reckoned the years of his reign as the years of his
tribunician power. It was conferred by a rogatio (following a decree of
the senate) which was brought before the people in the Comitia. An
interval (trinum nundinum) elapsed between the senate's decree and the
Comitia and so the assumption of the tribunicia potestas came some time
after the dies imperii (see on c. 6, 3). This interval in the case of Nero
was 53 days, of Otho 45, of Domitian 17, of Vitellius 12. Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 875, explains our corrupt passage as referring to an unusually
long interval in the case of Vespasian (cf. Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2635). This
explanation is not satisfactory, for though the reading here is uncertain,
the general sense seems clearly to be that Vespasian did not accept the
tribunicia potestas for some time after it was formally conferred upon
him (cf. Vitell. 8, 2, cognomen Germanici delatum ab omnibus cupide
recepit, Augusti distulit, Caesaris in perpetuum recusavit). Bury (op. cit.
p. 377), following Herzog (Röm. Staatsverfassung ii 288 sq.), says:
"Vespasian made no alteration in the constitution of the Principate; but
he attempted to introduce some innovations in practice. He seems to
have laid less stress than his predecessors on the tribunicia potestas, and
to have even intended to discontinue the official counting of the years of
his reign as tribunician years. He seems to have contemplated a return
to the first system of Augustus (27-23 B.C.) which based the position of
the Princeps mainly on the consulate. He was ordinary consul himself
in every year of his reign except two (73 and 78 A.D.), and his son and
consort Titus was generally his colleague." Tacitus does not mention any
delay in Vespasian's receiving the tribunicia potestas, and in a military
diploma of March 6, 70 A.D. (C.I.L. iii 849, Newton 30) we find “Imp.
Vespasianus Caesar August., tribunic. potest., cos. II"; so on a milestone
in Sardinia (C.I.L. x 8005, Newton 125), dating between January and
July, 70 A.D., he is described as “pont. max., tr[ib. po]t., cos. II, i[mp]
desig. III, p.p. (i.e. pater patriae)." Vespasian's tribunicia potestas was
...
reckoned from July 1, 69 A.D. (his dies imperii, c. 6, 3) and not from
Jan. 70, as is shown by a diploma of Dec. 2, 76 (C.I.L. iii p. 853, Newton
35) with tr. p. VIII (not VII).
aut: there is a hiatus between potestatem and patris patriae in all
the principal MSS. except & which has nec patris patriae; some of the
later have et patris or patrisque. Roth suggested aut, which is ably
defended by Alexander (op. cit. p. 10 sq.) who tabulates the connectives,
adversatives, and disjunctives which follow ne
quidem in Suetonius,
and shows that aut is used almost exclusively in cases where nouns in
their various relations are to be brought together (e.g. Vitell. 13, 3, ne in
sacrificio quidem umquam aut itinere ullo temperavit). Hirschfeld and
others would insert statim after potestatem, assuming that it was lost
through haplography; Bücheler statim пес.
patris patriae appellationem: Vespasian does not bear this title in
the diploma of March 6, 70 A.D., though he does on the Sardinian milestone of the same period (see above on tribuniciam potestatem); it is
found in inscriptions of 71 and subsequent years (e.g. diploma of Apr. 5,
71, C.I.L. x 897, Newton 31). The title of pater (or parens) patriae is
applied by Livy to Romulus and Camillus; by Cicero to Marius; Cicero
himself was so saluted in the senate by Catulus (cf. Juv. viii 244, Roma
patrem patriae Ciceronem libera dixit, with Mayor's note). The dictator
Caesar received it by decree shortly before his death. In 2 B.C. the
"senate, knights, and people" named Augustus pater patriae (Mon.
Ancyr. 6, 24: Suet. Aug. 58), and his successors (except Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius) received this title some time after their accession. The first offer
of it was often refused, e.g. by Nero (Ner. 8), Vespasian, and Hadrian
(Spart. Hadr. 6); Tiberius definitely declined it (Tib. 26, 67: Tac. A. i
72, ii 87). Pertinax (192 A.D.) was the first who received the title on his
accession (Capitol. Pert. 5, primus sane omnium ea die qua Augustus est
appellatus etiam patris patriae nomen accepit). Dio (liii 18) says that
though the title might seem to invest the emperors with the patria postestas
over their subjects, yet it was originally only given as an honour and an
admonition (ἔς τε τιμὴν καὶ ἐς παραίνεσιν) that they should love their subjects
as they would their children, and that their subjects should revere them
as they would their fathers (cf. Sen. Clem. i 14, 2). See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 779 sqq.
nam: Kraffert's conjecture iam is needless. nam is used here (as in
c. 14, Tit. 1, Dom. 4, 1, etc.) elliptically, the connecting thought having
to be supplied (Kühner-Stegmann, ii 116). It was not surprising that
Vespasian did not hedge himself about with state and cared little for
triumphs or imperial titles, for he was careless even about taking the
customary precautions to secure an emperor's safety.
consuetudinem scrutandi salutantes: the danger of assassination led
to the introduction of this scrutatio by Augustus when he was "purging”
the senate; cf. Aug. 35, 2, ne admissum quidem tunc quemquam senatorum
nisi solum et praetemptato sinu (i.e. the fold of the toga where weapons
might be concealed). Under Claudius the examination of callers
(salutatores) was very thorough (Claud. 35, 1, salutatoribus scrutatores
semper apposuit, et quidem omnibus et acerbissimos); men, women, and
children were rigorously searched, and the cases for pens and styles
(calamariae et graphiariae thecae) were taken from every man's attendant
or scribe. Senatorial envoys to Septimius Severus on his march to Rome
(193 A.D.) were searched: Spart. Sev. 6, legati senatus excussi ne quid
ferri haberent. We read of scrutatores employed by the Eastern kings:
Justin xxxviii 1, scrutator ab Ariarathe regio more missus. Plutarch
(Dion 19) says that Plato was the only person allowed into the presence
of Dionysius without being searched (ἀδιερεύνητος), and he also tells
(Timol. 15) how when this younger Dionysius was living at Corinth, having
lost the tyranny at Syracuse, some one visited him and jestingly shook out
his robe when he entered his apartment as is customary when persons
approach a tyrant, whereupon Dionysius bade him "do the same when he
went out, that he might not carry off some of the moveables."
omiserat: Dio lx 3, ἡ ἔρευνα ἡ διὰ πάντων ἐπὶ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ ἐπαύσατο.
CHAPTER 13.
amicorum libertatem: cf. (Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, ferebat patienter
amicorum motus, contumeliis eorum, ut erat facetissimus, iocularibus respondens. Tacitus (Dial. 8) describes Vesp. as patientissimus veri. For libertas
in the sense of παρρησία ‘"freedom of speech" cf. Aug. 54, nec ideo libertas
aut contumacia fraudi cuiquam fuit: Ov. Her. 15, 68, hoc mihi libertas, hoc
pia lingua dedit; it is mainly post-Aug., especially frequent in Quintilian
(see Bonnell, Lex. Quintil.), e.g. iii 8, 48, quae in aliis libertas est, in aliis
licentia vocatur: ix 2, 27, quid minus figuratum quam vera libertas?
causidicorum: Eutrop. vii 20, convicia a causidicis et philosophis in se
dicta leniter tulit (Vespasianus). The term causidicus (= causarum actor)
was most frequently used in a contemptuous sense; see Wilkins on Cic.
de or. i 202, non enim causidicum nescio quem neque clamatorem aut
rabulam..conquirimus. The causidicus, like our barristers, was instructed
by a solicitor (pragmaticus), who provided the pleader with "weapons"
(Quintil. xii 3, 4, qui tela agentibus subministrant).
The abusive tactics
and malpractices of Roman pleaders at this period are often referred to;
see Quintil. xii 9, 8 and 10: Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 186.
=
figuras: obliqua dicta, indirect attacks, veiled sarcasms, innuendoes
(ὑπόνοιαι); cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, Sed quid mirum in amicis, cum etiam
causidicorum obliqua dicta, et philosophorum contumaciam contemneret?
Quintilian (ix 1, 14) says that figura (σχήμα) was limited by recent
rhetoricians to cases where aliud simulatur dici quam dicitur; and again
(ix 2, 65): genus... in quo per quandam suspicionem quod non dicimus
accipi volumus, non utique contrarium, ut in εἰρωνείᾳ, sed aliud latens et
auditori quasi inveniendum. Quod iam fere solum schema a nostris
vocatur
...
Eius triplex usus est: unus si dicere palam parum tutum est,
alter si non decet, tertius qui venustatis modo gratia adhibetur, etc. Cf.
Macrob. Sat. vii 3, loedoriam (λοιδορίαν) exprobrationem esse ac directam
contumeliam: scomma (σκῶμμα) enim paene dixerim morsum figuratum,
quia saepe fraude vel urbanitate tegitur, ut aliud sonet, aliud intellegas:
Plut. 631 E, ὀνειδισμὸς γάρ ἐστι τῆς ἁμαρτίας παρεσχηματισμένος τὸ σκῶμμα:
Spart. Sev. 14, damnabantur plerique, cur iocati essent, alii, cur tacuissent, alii, cur pleraque figurata (i.e. with double meanings) dixissent, ut
“ecce imperator vere nominis sui, vere Pertinax, vere Severus.” For
other examples of dicta figurata see Suet. Dom. 10.
philosophorum contumaciam: Vespasian was forced to banish these
Stoic and Cynic philosophers when they fomented sedition: Dio lxvi 13,
ὡς δ' οὖν καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ ἐκ τῶν στωικῶν καλουμένων λόγων προαχθέντες (excitati),
μεθ᾽ ὧν καὶ Δημήτριος ὁ κυνικός, συχνὰ καὶ οὐκ ἐπιτήδεια τοῖς παροῦσι δημοσίᾳ, τῷ
τῆς φιλοσοφίας προσχήματι καταχρώμενοι, διελέγοντο, κἀκ τούτου καὶ ὑποδιέφθειρόν
τινας, ἔπεισεν ὁ Μουκιανὸς τὸν Οὐεσπασιανὸν πάντας τοὺς τοιούτους ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
ἐκβαλεῖν . . καὶ πάντας αὐτίκα τοὺς φιλοσόφους ὁ Οὐεσπασιανός, πλὴν τοῦ Μουσωνίου
(i.e. Musonius Rufus, the Stoic), ἐκ τῆς ῾Ρώμης ἐξέβαλε, τὸν δὲ δὴ Δημήτριον καὶ
τὸν Ὁστιλιανὸν καὶ ἐς νήσους κατέκλεισε. The leader of the Stoic opposition
to Vespasian was Helvidius Priscus (see below c. 15). Philosophers were
again expelled from Rome by Domitian in 93 A.D. (Dom. 10, 3).
Licinium Mucianum: see on c. 6, 4. Tacitus describes his character,
H. i 10: Luxuria industria, comitate adrogantia, malis bonisque artibus
mixtus. Nimiae voluptates, cum vacaret: quotiens expedierat (i.e. when
on service), magnae virtutes. Palam laudares: secreta male audiebant (i.e.
his private life was in bad repute). Sed apud subiectos, apud proximos,
apud collegas variis illecebris potens, et cui expeditius fuerit tradere
imperium quam obtinere. In H. ii 5 Tac. says that if his faults and those
of Vespasian were removed and their virtues were united in one man, such
a man would have made an excellent emperor: egregium principatus
temperamentum, si demptis utriusque vitiis solae virtutes miscerentur. In
an arrogant letter to the senate (H. iv 4) Mucianus boasted that he had
the imperial power in his hands, and made a present of it to Vespasian:
Id vero erga rem publicam superbum, erga principem contumeliosum, quod
in manu sua fuisse imperium donatumque Vespasiano iactabat.
impudicitiae: ‘‘impudicitia de flagitiis contra naturam commissis sive
stupro marium, atque ita opponitur libidinibus et adulteriis” (Baumg.-
Cr.); cf. Iul. 52, 3, et impudicitiae eum et adulteriorum flagrasse infamia:
Aug. 71, 1, infamiam impudicitiae facillime refutavit (though not free
from libidines).
,
hactenus
ut: the use of hactenus.
ut to express a limited
amount or degree occurs also in Ner. 31, 2, domum hactenus comprobavit, ut se diceret quasi hominem tandem habitare coepisse: ib. 34, 1:
40, 4: Gramm. 2; cf. Cic. de or. ii 27, 119, artem quidem et praecepta
dumtaxat hactenus requirunt, ut certis dicendi luminibus ornentur. For
other uses of hactenus in Suet. see on Dom. 16, 2.
retaxare: a compound not found elsewhere. The post-Aug. taxare
(connected with tangere) means (1) to touch sharply (2) to twit or censure
(3) to appraise or value a thing by feeling it, and so, generally, to assess.
For (2) cf. Aug. 4, 2, non tantum ut pistoris, sed etiam ut nummulari
nepotem taxat Augustum: Dom. 10, 43; for (3) cf. Calig. 38, 3, taxato
prius modo summae: Aug. 41, 1, senatorum censum ampliavit ac pro
octingentorum milium summa duodecies sestertium (i.e. 1,200,000 sesterces)
taxavit.
..
clausulam: a correction by Duker of clausulae, the reading of all MSS.
clausula was used for the concluding words of a speech, letter, story,
poem, or play; cf. Aug. 99, 1, (Augustus) percontatus, ecquid eis videretur
mimum vitae commode transegisse, adiecit et clausulam : εἰ δέ τι | ἔχοι καλῶς
τὸ παίγνιον, κρότον δότε, κ.τ.λ.: Ner. 39, 3, Atellanarum histrio . in novissima clausula "Orcus vobis ducit pedes” senatum gestu notarat: Cic.
de or. ii 240, a te ipso ficta narratio; addidisti clausulam: Val. Max. v
10, 2, hanc adiciendo clausulam (orationi).
vir sum: cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, namque Licinium Mucianum, quo
adiutore ad imperium provenerat, fiducia meritorum insolentem flectebat,
adhibito aliquo utrique familiari, id unum dicens: “nosti me virum esse.''
Vespasian used vir as the opposite of impudicus or muliebria passus; cf.
Verg. E. iii 7, parcius ista viris tamen obicienda memento (Damoetas
warns the debauched Menalcas not to bring charges of theft against him).
Salvium Liberalem: C. Salvius Liberalis Nonius Bassus, four times
quinquennalis of Urbs Salvia in Picenum and patronus of the same colonia,
was admitted to the senate by Vespasian and Titus when censors (see on
c. 9, 2) at first inter tribunicios and later inter praetorios. His distinctions
are given in C.I.L. ix 5533 (Dessau 1011): [C. Salv]io C. f. Vel. Liberali
[Nonio] Basso cos., procos. provin[ciae Macedoniae, legato Augustorum
[iuridi]c. Britann., legato leg. V Maced., [fratri A]rvali, allecto ab divo
Vespasiano [et divo Ti]to inter tribunicios, ab isdem [allecto] inter praetorios, quinq. IIII, p.c. Hic sorte [procos. fac]tus provinciae Asiae se
excusavit. He was famous as an eloquent pleader at Rome. Under
Domitian he was brought to trial (Plin. Ep. iii 9, 23) and probably
banished (relegatus), but in the reign of Trajan we find him defending
Marius Priscus, governor of Africa, who was accused by Pliny and Tacitus
(Plin. Ep. ii 11, 17, dixit pro Mario Salvius Liberalis, vir subtilis, dispositus, acer, disertus) and in the same year (100 A.D.) he also appeared
for Caecilius Classicus who was indicted by the provincials of Baetica in
Spain, their case being conducted by Pliny (Ep. iii 9, 36).
quid ad Caesarem, si
habet?: an example of the causidicorum
figurae mentioned above, the implication being that the avaricious Vespasian
might wish to have Hipparchus unjustly condemned in order to seize his
vast wealth. For the formula “quid (sc. attinet) ad?'' cf. Plaut. Men. 722,
quid id ad me?: Cic. Verr. ii 45, 116, quid id ad praetorem uter possessor
sit?
Hipparchus: this may have been (Ti. Claudius) Hipparchus (falsely
called Plutarchus by Suidas s.v. Ηρώδης). He was condemned for treason
and his property was confiscated (Philostrat. vit. soph. ii 1 p. 56 Kayser;
cf. C.I.A. iii 38, τὰ Ἱππάρχου χωρία τὰ ὑπὸ τοῦ φίσκου πραθέντα).
His son
was Ti. Cl. Atticus Herodes, consul under Trajan and again under Hadrian.
sestertium milies: i.e. milies centena milia sestertium, 100,000,000
sesterces, about £850,000.
Demetrium Cynicum: this antimonarchical champion of Cynic independence was banished to an island by Vespasian in 71 (Dio lxvi 13).
He had been equally defiant of Nero; Epictetus (Dissert. i 25, 22) cites
him as saying to Nero: ἀπειλεῖς μοι θάνατον, σοὶ δ᾽ ἡ φύσις (Tu mihi mortem
minitaris, natura tibi). Caligula had tried to win him over by an offer
of 200,000 sesterces, which was rejected with scorn (Sen. Ben. vii 11).
Tacitus mentions him in A. xvi 34 as being present during the last hours
of the doomed Thrasea Paetus (66 A.D.) and discussing with him the
immortality of the soul; again in H. iv 40 as incurring ill-repute for
defending Egnatius Celer who was accused by the Stoic Musonius Rufus
in 70 A.D. Seneca bestows enthusiastic praise on his friend Demetrius
('Demetrius noster," Dial. i 3, 3; Ep. 20,9; 62, 3; 67, 14; 91, 19);
in Ben. vii 8 he says "Huic non dubito quin providentia et talem vitam
et talem dicendi facultatem dederit, ne aut exemplum saeculo nostro aut
convicium deesset.” Philostratus in his fantastic Life of Apollonius of
Tyana says that Demetrius (whom he describes as ἀνὴρ συνειληφὼς πᾶν τὸ
ἐν Κυνικῇ κράτος) was a friend and would-be disciple of Apollonius, whom.
he met at Corinth (iv 25) and later at Athens (v 19). He also mentions
that Tigellinus had Demetrius banished from Rome under Nero (iv 42);
that Apollonius recommended Demetrius to Titus at Antioch to teach
him how to rule (vi 31); and that Demetrius was living at Puteoli in the
reign of Domitian (vii 10).
assurgere: a usual mark of respect; cf. Aug. 56, 2, eisdem, praetextatis
adhuc, assurrectum ab universis in theatro: Claud. 6, 1, spectaculis
advenienti assurgere.. solebant: Iul. 78, 1: Tib. 31, 2: Cic. Inv. i 30, 48,
ut maioribus natu assurgatur. So in Hom. Il. i 533, θεοὶ δ᾽ ἅμα πάντες
ἀνέσταν.
oblatrantem: this compound is used (with dat., acc., or absol.) in
post-Aug. writers to describe snarling abuse; e.g. Sil. Ital. viii 249,
infima dum vulgi fovet, oblatratque senatum: Sen. Ira iii 43, quid illum
oblatrantem tibi exterrere viribus tuis tentas? Dio (lxvi 13) tells the
story about Demetrius differently. He says that when Demetrius, even
after being sentenced to exile, kept on provoking the emperor by insults,
Vespasian sent a message to him to say that even though Demetrius courted
death he would not put to death a mere barking dog: Σὺ μὲν πάντα ποιεῖς
ἵνα σε ἀποκτείνω, ἐγὼ δὲ κύνα ὑλακτοῦντα οὐ φονεύω.
canem: canis (like κύων) was used of Cynic philosophers; cf. Varr.
Men. 516, Menippus ille nobilis
canis: Mart. iv 53, 8, non est hic
Cynicus, Cosme, quid ergo? canis: Auson. Epitaph. 31 (on the tomb of
Diogenes the Cynic with the emblem of a dog upon it), Dic, canis, hic
cuius tumulus? Canis. At canis hic quis? | Diogenes. Obiit? Non
obiit, sed abit. It is doubtful whether the Cynics (Kuvικοί) derived their
name from the gymnasium called Κυνόσαργες at Athens where their founder
Antisthenes taught, or from their filthy doglike (κυνικός) mode of life.
CHAPTER 14.
offensarum minime memor: Eutrop. vii 20, offensarum et inimicitiarum immemor fuit; [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, huius inter cetera bona illud
singulare fuit, inimicitias oblivisci, adeo ut Vitellii hostis sui filiam
locupletissime dotatam splendidissimo coniungeret viro. This forgiving
spirit was not shown by Vespasian in the case of Julius Sabinus; see note
on “coniurationes,” c. 25 infr.
executor: a rare post-Aug. subst.; no other instance is cited of its
use in the sense of ultor, punitor, though exequi in the sense of ulcisci,
punire, is found from Livy on; e.g. Suet. Iul. 67, 1, delicta neque observabat omnia, neque pro modo exequebatur.
..
Vitellii filiam. maritavit: this daughter of Vitellius by Galeria
Fundana (see Vitell. 6) had been betrothed to P. Valerius Asiaticus,
governor of Gallia Belgica, who took the side of Vitellius at the beginning
of 69 A.D.; Tac. H. i 59, accessere partibus (Vitellii) Valerius Asiaticus
2F
Belgicae provinciae legatus, quem mox Vitellius generum adscivit, etc. On
the overthrow of Vitellius he came to terms with Vespasian's generals
and was designated consul towards the end of 69 (H. iv 4), but died
shortly afterwards; cf. C.I.L. vi 1528, Dis Manibus D. [Valeri] Asiatici
consulis designati. Subsequently Vespasian arranged another match for
the daughter of Vitellius, but the name of the bridegroom is unknown.
See Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 353.
instruxit: instruere was the word used of providing a bride with outfit
or equipment including trousseau, trinkets, attendants, etc.; Plin. Ep. νί 32,
debet, secundum condicionem mariti ("in keeping with her husband's
position'"), veste, comitatu (quibus non quidem augetur dignitas, ornatur
tamen) instrui: Plaut. Mil. 981, aurum atque ornamenta, quae illi instruxti
mulieri.
interdicta aula: in consequence of the offence he had given by his
behaviour when a comes of Nero on his musical tour in Greece; see c. 4, 4.
ΤΕ
quidam: Dio (lxvi 11) gives his name as Phoebus: τοῦ
Φοίβου
προσελθόντος αὐτῷ καὶ ἀπολογουμένου, ὅτι ἐπὶ τοῦ Νέρωνος ἐσκυθρωπακότα ποτε
αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ θεάτρου ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι, ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἀσχημονοῦντα ἑώρα τὸν αὐτοκράτορα,
ἐκέλευσε πρὸς ὀργὴν ἀπελθεῖν, τοῦ δὲ ἐρομένου ὅποι, “ ἐς κόρακας” εἶπεν, ὑπὲρ τούτου
οὖν ἀπολογουμένου τοῦ Φοίβου, οὔτε τι κακὸν αὐτὸν εἰργάσατο, οὔτε ἀπεκρίνατο αὐτῷ
ἄλλο οὐδὲν πλὴν αὐτὸ τοῦτο ὅτι “ ἐς κόρακας ἄπελθε.” The same name occurs
in Tac. A. xvi 5 quoted on c. 4, 4.
=
ex officio admissionis:
ex ministris, quibus officium admittendi
homines ad Principem; cf. vit. Horat. 6, Augustus epistularum ei officium
optulit (offered him the post of secretary, ab epistulis). The control of
the entrée to the imperial receptions (salutationes) was a special office
(officium admissionis); those who held it were called Augusti liberti or
servi ab admissione, or ab officiis et admissione, and in later times
admissionales, and they acted under the direction of a magister admissionum. The callers who enjoyed the right of prima admissio were distinguished as primi amici, cohors primae (as opp. to secundae) admissionis,
and were received either singly or in small groups in the private apartments; less important visitors merely defiled before the emperor in the
atrium; cf. Sen. Ben. vi 33, non sunt isti amici,
qui in primas et
secundas admissiones digeruntur. Trajan is praised by Pliny (Paneg. 47)
for dispensing with the ceremonies of admissio; so too Alexander Severus
by Lampridius (Alex. Sev. 4).
See Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 93;
Daremberg-Saglio, i 71, iv 1061.
...
It
abire Morboviam: this phrase (= abire in malam crucem) does not
occur elsewhere. Morbovia may be coined from morbus and via (Bremi),
or the termination may be like that in Gergovia, a town in Gaul.
seems to mean "Plague-town"; I have translated it by "Pest," an alternative name of Budapest; Lewis and Short render it "Sickdom' 'Sickdom"; Otto
(Sprichwörter der Röm.) gives as the German equivalent "ins Pfefferland."
Marcilius
Most of the older editors regard Morboviam as corrupt.
suggested Μακαρίαν, from the Greek euphemism ἄπαγ᾽ ἐς Μακαρίαν (Ar.
Eq. 1151): Barth Corvoniam (cf. ἐς κόρακας in Dio, quoted above) :
Baumg.-Cr. would eject Morboviam and substitute ἐς κόρακας.
non ultra verba excanduit: cf. Ner. 40, 4, hactenus excanduit, ut
malum iis qui descissent minaretur. The constr. in aliquem excandescere
is post-Aug.; e.g. Colum. vii 12, 5, ut
semper excandescant in exteros;
so exardescere in, of passionate love or anger, Tac. A. xi 12, H. i 58.
nam: see on c. 12.
و.
Mettium Pompusianum: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, monentibus amicis ut
caveret a Metio Pompusiano, de quo sermo percrebruerat regnaturum, consulem fecit, alludens tali cavillo: ‘‘quandoque memor erit tanti beneficii'':
Dio lxvii 12, Μέτιος Πομπουσιανός ὃν ὁ μὲν Οὐεσπασιανὸς μαθὼν ἐκ φήμης
τινὸς ὅτι μοναρχήσει, οὐδὲν κακὸν εἰργάσατο, ἔτι δὲ καὶ ἐτίμα, λέγων ὅτι Πάντως μου
μνημονεύσει καὶ πάντως με ἀντιτιμήσει. Domitian dealt severely with Mettius,
first banishing him and then putting him to death; see Dom. 10, 3. He
is probably to be identified with the L. Pompusius Mettius mentioned
(C.I.L. vi 1495) as praefectus aerarii Saturni for four years (c. 76-80 A.D.).
genesim habere imperatoriam: i.e. he had a "nativity" or horoscope
cast by the astrologers, which foretold that one day he would be emperor.
See note on “genitura,” Tit. 9, 2.
beneficii memorem futurum: i.e. when Mettius became emperor, he
would gratefully remember Vespasian who had given him his first step by
making him consul. In [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9 Vespasian is rightly said to
be speaking with scoffing irony (alludens cavillo). Beroaldus thinks that
he took the same view which M. Antoninus afterwards expressed to Verus
when warned by him to beware of Avidius Cassius: “si Cassio divinitus
debetur imperium, non poterimus interficere, etiam si velimus; scis enim
proavi tui (i.e. Trajan) dictum: Successorem suum nullus occidit'' (Vulc.
Gall. Avid. Cass. c. 2). Vespasian, relying on his own horoscope and those
of his family, was confident that his sons would succeed him; see c. 25.
CHAPTER 15.
non temere: = vix; see on Tit. 6, 2. For the leniency of Vespasian cf.
Eutrop. vii 19, placidissimae lenitatis, ut qui maiestatis quoque contra se
reos non facile puniret ultra exilii poenam: Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, Satellites
tyrannidis, nisi qui forte atrocius longe processerant, flectere potius maluit
quam excruciatos delere; prudentissime ratus nefaria ministeria a pluribus
metu curari. Dein coniurationum multas scelere inulto abscedere patiebatur; comiter, uti erat, stultitiae arguens, qui ignorarent quanta moles
molestiaque imperio inesset.
absente eo: before Vespasian arrived at Rome from Alexandria,
Mucianus, who was all-powerful, had put to death Calpurnius Galerianus
(the innocent son of Calpurnius Piso who had headed the conspiracy
against Nero in 65 A.D.), L. Piso (proconsul of Africa), and the young son
of Vitellius (Tac. H. iv 11, 49, 80).
..
Helvidio Prisco: Tacitus (H. iv 5) sketches the character of this
remarkable man. In his youth he had devoted himself to the study of
the Stoic philosophy, “non ut plerique, ut nomine magnifico segne otium
velaret, sed quo firmior adversus fortuita rem publicam capesseret civis,
senator, maritus, gener, amicus, cunctis vitae officiis aequabilis, opum contemptor, recti pervicax, constans adversus metus. Erant quibus adpetentior
famae videretur, quando etiam sapientibus cupido gloriae novissima
exuitur.'" He married Fannia, daughter of Thrasea Paetus (cf. Plin.
2F2
Ep. vii 19), and like his father-in-law cherished vain republican ideals and
celebrated the birthdays of Brutus and Cassius (Juv. v 36). Thrasea was
put to death by Nero, and Priscus was banished (66 A.D.) but returned
under Galba and carried on a bitter warfare with Eprius Marcellus the
accuser of Thrasea (Tac. H. iv 6-9). By his meaningless and persistent
defiance of Vespasian, who in his eyes was as bad as Nero, he drove the
emperor into ordering first his banishment and shortly afterwards (in 73)
his execution. Dio (lxvi 12) attributes Vespasian's hatred of him to his
revolutionary denunciations of imperial power: ὅτι ταραχώδης τε ἦν, καὶ τῷ
ὄχλῳ προσέκειτο, βασιλείας τε ἀεὶ κατηγόρει, καὶ δημοκρατίαν ἐπῄνει, καὶ ἔπραττεν
ἀκόλουθα τούτοις, καὶ συνίστη τινάς, ὥσπερ που φιλοσοφίας ἔργον ὂν τό τε τοὺς
κρατοῦντας προπηλακίζειν, καὶ τὸ τὰ πλήθη ταράττειν, τό τε τὰ καθεστηκότα συγχεῖν,
καὶ τὸ νεώτερα αὐτοῖς πράγματα ἐπεισάγειν.
..
qui se.. salutaverat: this is one of the passages where the reflexive
(referring to the subject of the principal clause) is used in a subordinate
clause which is not oblique; cf. Ner. 35, 3, Poppaeam ictu calcis occidit
quod se reversum conviciis incesserat (where, as Bagge says, one would
expect either eum incesserat or se incessisset): Galb. 12, 1, quod
civitates, quae cunctantius sibi accesserant, punisset: Tit. 4, 3, altero
equo inscenso, cuius rector circa se dimicans occubuerat: Iul. 74, 1,
Philemonem,
qui necem suam per venenum inimicis promiserat, non
gravius quam simplici morte puniit. For examples of this in other writers
see Kühner-Stegmann, i 613; Draeger, Hist. Synt. p. 75.
privato nomine: without using any of the titles of respect such as
“Auguste,” “Caesar,” “Imperator.” Cf. Sen. de Const. 18, Gaius
Caligula iratus fuit Herennio Macro, quod illum Gaium salutaverat: nec
impune cessit primipilario quod Caligulam dixerat.
in praetura: Priscus was praetor in 70 A.D. and dedicated the site of
the new Capitol (Tac. H. iv 53). As praetor designate he resisted proposals
brought forward in the senate to please the emperor, maintaining (1) that
financial retrenchment should be undertaken by the senate and not left
to the emperor; (2) that the Capitol should be restored at the public
expense, and that Vespasian should only be asked to assist (H. iv 9).
edictis transmiserat: the emperor's name and titles of honour
should have appeared in the praescriptio at the head of the praetor's
edict as of other official documents; cf. Tac. H. ii 65, where Cluvius Rufus
was accused of aiming at empire because ‘‘diplomatibus nullum principem
praescripsisset.” Some think that honore refers to prayers for the
emperor's health and prosperity, such as were customary in the concluding
formula (subscriptio) of magistrates' letters to him; see Tib. 32,2:
Dio lvii 11. The use of transmittere in the sense of praetermittere ‘‘to
pass over, say nothing about" is post-Aug.; cf. Calig. 10, 2, quae ipse
pateretur incredibili dissimulatione transmittens: Tac. H. iv 9, eam
sententiam modestissimus quisque silentio, deinde oblivio transmisit.
altercationibus: altercationes in the law courts meant disputes or
interchanges between opposing counsel, as distinct from a set speech
(perpetua oratio) and the examination of witnesses (interrogatio testium);
so too in the senate it meant "word-fights" between magistrates, e.g.
between the consuls and tribunes (Liv. xxviii 45, xxxiii 22: Cic. Fam. i 2,
Att. i 16, iv 13), between the praetors and the proconsul Caesar (Suet.
Iul. 23, 1, triduo per irritas altercationes absumpto). See Mommsen,
Staatsr. iii 947. The Stoic Epictetus (Dissert. i 2, 19-22) mentions with
approval an interchange between Priscus and Vespasian when the emperor
sent a message to him to absent himself from the senate: Προσπέμψαντος
γὰρ αὐτῷ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ, ἵνα μὴ εἰσέλθῃ εἰς τὴν σύγκλητον (senatum), ἀπεκρίνατο·
᾿Ἐπὶ σοί ἐστι μὴ ἐᾶσαί με εἶναι συγκλητικόν· μέχρι δ᾽ ἂν ὦ, δεῖ μ᾽ εἰσέρχεσθαι. ῎Αγε,
ἀλλ᾽ εἰσελθών, φησί, σιώπησον. Μή μ' ἐξέταζε (ne me roga sententiam), καὶ σιωπήσω.
᾿Αλλὰ δεῖ με ἐξετάσαι. Κἀμὲ εἰπεῖν τὸ φαινόμενον δίκαιον. ᾿Αλλ᾽ ἐὰν εἴπῃς, ἀποκτενῶ
σε. Πότε οὖν σοι εἶπον ὅτι ἀθάνατός εἰμι; καὶ σὺ τὸ σὸν ποιήσεις, κἀγὼ τὸ ἐμόν. Σόν
ἐστιν, ἀποκτεῖναι· ἐμόν, ἀποθανεῖν μὴ τρέμοντα· σόν, φυγαδεῦσαι (relegare)· ἐμόν,
ἐξελθεῖν μὴ λυπούμενον.
non
succensuit: Dio (lxvi 12) says that Vespasian once went out
of the senate-house in tears after Priscus had been so insolent that the
tribunes arrested him: Πρίσκος Ἑλουίδιος . τοῖς Στωικοῖς δόγμασιν ἐντραφείς,
καὶ τὴν τοῦ Θρασέου παρρησίαν οὐ σὺν καιρῷ μιμούμενος, στρατηγῶν (i.e. being praetor)
δὲ τηνικαῦτα, οὔτε τι πρὸς τιμὴν τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος ἔδρα, καὶ προσέτι καὶ βλασφημῶν
αὐτὸν οὐκ ἐπαύετο. Καί ποτε διὰ τοῦτο οἱ δήμαρχοι (tribunes) συλλαβόντες αὐτὸν
τοῖς ὑπηρέταις παρέδοσαν. Συνεχύθη τε ὁ Οὐεσπασιανὸς καὶ δακρύσας ἐκ τοῦ βουλευτηρίου ἐξῆλθε, τοσοῦτον μόνον εἰπὼν ὅτι “ ἐμὲ μὲν υἱὸς διαδέξεται, ἢ οὐδεὶς ἄλλος”
(for these words see Vesp. 25).
in ordinem redactus: in ordinem cogere (less frequently redigere, cf.
Plin. Ep. ii 6, 5) was properly a military phrase for reducing an officer to
the ranks, and it became a technical expression for treating a magistrate
as if he were an ordinary private citizen (Liv. iii 35, 6) and thwarting and
resisting him in the exercise of his legal functions (Liv. iii 51, 13: vi 38,
12) especially in the exercise of tribunician powers (Liv. xxv 3, 9: xliii 16,
10: Plin. Ep. i 23, 1). See Mommsen, Staatsr. i 139. The emperor
Claudius used the phrase of himself when disrespectfully treated by the
people of Ostia; Claud. 38, 1, Ostiensibus, quia sibi subeunti Tiberim
scaphas obviam non miserint, graviter correptis eaque cum invidia (i.e. in
such reproachful terms) ut in ordinem se coactum conscriberet, repente
tantum non satis facientis modo veniam dedit. For ante
quam with the
participle see on Galb. 11, prius
quamvis: see on Vitell. 4.
quam.. oppressis.
There
relegatum: we are not told what form his banishment took; he may
have been sent to an island. When first banished by Nero in 66, he went
to Apollonia in Macedonia. relegatio was a milder penalty than exilium
and did not necessarily involve a loss of civil or personal rights.
were two forms of it: (1) the condemned person was forbidden to live at
Rome, or at any other specified place; (2) he was compelled to live on an
island or within some other limited area. Either form might be temporary
or permanent. The relegatus retained his civitas, and forfeiture of his
property, either total or partial, could only be directed by the judge in
cases of perpetua relegatio (Ulp. Dig. xlviii 22, 7, etc.). See also on
Tit. 8, 5, in asperrimas insularum avehi. In Plin. Ep. vii 19 and Tac. H. i 3
(contrast Ann. xvi 35) exilium is loosely used of Priscus' banishment.
percussores: executioners were often sent to despatch exiles; cf.
Calig. 28, misit circum insulas, qui universos (exules) contrucidarent: Tac.
H. i 2, plenum exiliis mare, infecti caedibus scopuli: ib. 46, Laco praefectus, tamquam in insulam seponeretur, ab evocato, quem ad caedem eius
Otho praemiserat, confossus.
servasset: cf. Tac. A. xi 37, where Claudius softens towards Messalina
and sends to save her, but Narcissus hurries on her death before the
reprieve arrives.
...
=
=
neque caede laetatus: laetatus is found only in some late MSS.,
its omission in the earlier being partly due to the similarity of its last
syll. to the first of the following iustis. O. Rossbach suggested gavisus
(not used by Suet.), but cf. Tib. 75, 1, morte eius ita laetatus est populus.
The difficulty of the sentence lies in neque, which is generally regarded as
an isolated instance in Suetonius of the very rare use of neque
non,
for which see Kühner-Stegmann, i 817. Some cite as parallel Dom. 20,
where nec is usually explained as non, but see note there. More
probably some words have been lost here; the original reading may have
been <neque nece > neque caede cuiusquam . . laetatus, cf. Tib. 62, 1, neque
tormentis neque supplicio cuiusquam pepercit. This then would be another of
the places where Suetonius couples synonymous words; e.g. Oth. 11, 1, discedere et abire; see on Vitell. 14, 1, necem atque supplicium. He uses both
nex and caedes in the sense of mors violenta; forced suicide is sometimes
denoted by nex (e.g. Ner. 35, 5, Senecam ad necem compulit). Other
conjectures are: laetatus est et iustis (Roth): laetatus est et quamvis
iustis (Bücheler): laetatus est et quamquam iustis (Alexander).
inlacrimavit: Vespasian seems to have been of a strangely emotional
nature. Dio (lxvi 12 and 16) mentions his being moved to tears by the
insults of Helvidius Priscus (see above) and also when the wife of Julius
Sabinus made a piteous but fruitless appeal to the emperor to spare the
lives of her husband and herself (see on c. 25). Titus resembled his father
in this respect (see Tit. 9, 3; 10, 1).
CHAPTER 16.
merito culpetur: so Tacitus, H. ii 5: prorsus, si avaritia abesset,
antiquis ducibus par. On the other hand, Aur. Vict. (Caes. 9) says: infirmus tamen, uti quidam prave putant, adversus pecuniam, cum satis
constet aerarii inopia ac labe urbium novas eum neque aliquamdiu postea
habitas vestigalium pensiones exquisivisse; after enumerating the public
works which Vespasian executed, Victor adds: quae tot tantaque brevi
confecta prudentiam magis quam avaritiam probavere. Eutropius (vii 9, 2)
qualifies the charge of avarice with praise for scrupulousness and
generosity: pecuniae tantum avidior fuit, ita tamen ut eam nulli iniuste
auferret; quam cum omni diligentiae provisione colligeret, tamen studiosissime largiebatur, praecipue indigentibus; nec facile ante eum cuiusquam
principis vel maior est libertas comperta vel iustior. Suidas follows
Eutropius: eἰς δὲ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν παρελθών, μετρίως τε καὶ σωφρόνως τὴν ἀρχὴν
διῴκητο, ἐπιθυμητικῶς μὲν δοκῶν ἔχειν χρημάτων· οὐ μὴν ὥστε παρὰ δίκην ἀφαιρεῖσθαί
τινα τῶν οἰκείων. καὶ τὸν πλοῦτον οὐκ ἐς τὰς ἡδονάς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐς τὰς δημοσίας χρείας
ἐποιεῖτο. οὔκουν εὕροι τις ἂν ἕτερον πρὸ τοῦδε βασιλέα οὔτε δαψιλέστερον, οὔτε
πρὸς τὸ ἴσον τε καὶ δίκαιον ἐξητασμένον τὴν πρὸς τὰς δωρεὰς ἐλευθεριότητα.
Dio (lxvi 2) says that it was Mucianus who set the example and encouraged Vespasian in exacting money for the treasury, his maxim being that
money forms the sinews of empire (νεῦρα τῆς ἡγεμονίας τὰ χρήματα).
Modern historians take the view that Vespasian incurred undeserved
odium for avaritia through his statesmanlike measures to put the
shattered finances of the empire on a sound footing: see Duruy, Histoire
des Romains iv² 653 sqq.: Schiller, Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit i 514 sqq.:
Bury, Stud. Rom. Emp. 378 sqq.
non contentus
revocasse: Dio (lxvi 8) says that Vespasian at
Alexandria renewed taxes which had been dropped, increased existing taxes,
and introduced fresh ones: πολλὰ δὲ καὶ τέλη (vectigalia), τὰ μέν τινα
ἐκλελειμμένα ἀνενεώσατο, τὰ δὲ καὶ νομιζόμενα προσεπηύξησε, καινά τε ἕτερα
προσκατεστήσατο. Dio adds that he adopted the same course later in the
rest of the subject territory, in Italy, and in Rome itself. Cf. von
Domaszewski, Gesch. röm. Kaiser ii³ 149.
omissa sub Galba vectigalia: the only tax which we know was abolished
by Galba was one of 24 per cent., quadrage(n)suma, of an unspecified
nature (Schiller, op. cit. i 368); cf. the coins of Galba with the words
quadragensuma remissa; quadragens, remissae; xxxx remissae (Eckhel, vi
p. 296). Hofstee (on Galb. 15) thinks that this tax was the quadragesima
Galliarum (see on Vesp. 1, 2), which Galba abolished as a reward to the
Gauls who had supported Vindex. Tacitus (H. i 51) mentions that Galba
remitted of the tribute paid by the Gauls. Under the head of vectigalia
were included decumae, tithes for the occupation of state-domains in Italy
or the provinces; scriptura for grazing cattle on public pastures; customsduties (portoria); 5 per cent. on manumissions and inheritances (vicesima
manumissionum et hereditatum); 4 per cent. on the sale of slaves (quinta
et vicesima mancipiorum venalium); 1 per cent. on sales of other kinds
(centesima rerum venalium); etc.
nova addidisse: e.g. the vectigal urinae (c. 23, 3) and the fiscus
Iudaicus (Dom. 12, 2).
tributa provinciis: tribute paid by the provinces was of different
kinds: (a) decumae, tithes of the produce of the land; (b) stipendium, a
tax of fixed amount, either a land tax (tributum soli) or a poll tax
(tributum capitis); (c) annona, the supply of corn, etc., either for the
officials and army of occupation (annona militaris) or for Rome (annona
civica), this latter coming from Africa and Egypt. The fiscus Alexandrinus,
assigned to Vespasian's reign, was probably connected with this corn-supply; see Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsb. 370.
negotiationes vel privato pudendas: the locus classicus for Roman
views on trades, etc., unbecoming a gentleman is Cic. Off. i 42, where
quaestus liberales are distinguished from quaestus inliberales et sordidi,
the latter including the occupations of faeneratores, portitores, mercenarii,
opifices, and all retail traders, “sordidi etiam putandi qui mercantur a
mercatoribus quod statim vendant; nihil enim proficiant, nisi admodum
mentiantur, nec vero est quicquam turpius vanitate (misrepresentation).'"
The only honourable occupation for senators was husbandry (agri cultura).
Vespasian had trading experience before he became emperor; see c. 4, 3.
exercuit: "carried on”; cf. Aug. 4, 2, modo unguentariam tabernam
modo pistrinum exercuisse: Vitell. 2, 1, Antiochi
furnariam exercentis
filia: Gramm. 23, 2, cum et officinas promercalium vestium exerceret. See
also on Vesp. 1, 3, faenus exercuit.
=
distraheret:
divenderet. This special use of distrahere (rem in
venditione) “to sell piecemeal" is found first in Tac. A. vi 17, copiam
vendendi secuta vilitate aegrius distrahebant (agros); cf. Suet. Calig.
...
39, 2, cui instrumento ("furniture'') distrahendo nihil non fraudis ac
lenocinii (“cajolery") adhibuit. In later writers distrahere was used
simply in the sense of vendere, e.g. Apul. Met. xi 28, veste mea quamvis
parvulo distracta, sufficientem conrasi summulam.
§ 2. honores
absolutiones venditare: Dio (lxvi 14) says this
trafficking was carried on through Caenis (see c. 3) Vespasian's concubine:
Πλεῖστόν τε ... ἴσχυσε (ἡ Καινίς), καὶ πλοῦτον ἀμύθητον ἤθροισεν, ὥστε καὶ νομισθῆναι ὅτι δι' αὐτῆς ἐκείνης ἐχρηματίζετο. πάμπολλα γὰρ παρὰ πολλῶν ἐλάμβανε, τοῖς
μὲν ἀρχάς, τοῖς δὲ ἐπιτροπείας, στρατείας, ἱερωσύνας, ἤδη δέ τισι καὶ ἀποφάσεις αὐτοῦ
(responsa principis) πιπράσκουσα. ἀπέκτεινε μὲν γὰρ ὁ Οὐεσπασιανὸς χρημάτων
ἕνεκεν οὐδένα, ἔσωσε δὲ πολλοὺς τῶν διδόντων. καὶ ἡ μὲν λαμβάνουσα ἐκείνη ἦν,
ὑπωπτεύετο δὲ ὁ Οὐεσπασιανὸς ἑκὼν αὐτῇ ἐπιτρέπειν τοῦτο ποιεῖν, ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων ὧν
ἔπραττεν.
procuratorum: these would be more especially the procuratores Caesaris
who managed the finances in the imperial provinces, and also those in
charge of the imperial fiscus at Rome; the title procurator was, however,
applied to a vast multitude of officials under the Empire (see Daremberg-Saglio, iv 662 sqq.; Hirschfeld, 410 sqq.).
pro spongiis uti: with this has been compared a saying of the Cynic
Diogenes; when he was asked how Dionysius (the younger, tyrant of
Syracuse) used his friends, he said, "Like bags; those which are full he
hangs up, and those which are empty he throws away" (Diog. Laert. vi 2, 6,
᾿Ερωτηθεὶς πῶς χρῆται Διονύσιος τοῖς φίλοις; ἔφη, ὡς θυλάκοις, τοὺς μὲν πλήρεις
κρημνῶν, τοὺς δὲ κενοὺς ῥίπτων). The process of making peculators of public
money disgorge (in the literal sense) their plunder is described by Demos
in Aristoph. Eq. 1145 sqq., τηρῶ γὰρ ἑκάστοτ᾽ αὐ- | τοὺς οὐδὲ δοκῶν ὁρᾶν |
κλέπτοντας· ἔπειτ᾿ ἀναγ- | κάζω πάλιν ἐξεμεῖν | ἅττ᾽ ἂν κεκλόφωσί μου | κημῷ
καταμηλῶν.
exprimeret umentes: for the squeezing of moisture out of sponges
cf. Plaut. Rud. 1008, Iam ego te hic, itidem quasi peniculus (= spongia)
novos exurgeri solet, | ni hunc amittis, exurgebo quidquid umoris est tibi.
Martial (xiii 47) compares the swelling of bread in milk to a sponge
absorbing water: Picentina Ceres (i.e. bread of Picenum) niveo sic nectare
crescit, | ut levis accepta spongia turget aqua.
§ 3. negata gratuita libertate: this herdsman had no savings (peculium)
wherewith to buy his freedom (cf. Sen. Ep. 80, peculium suum, quod
comparaverunt ventre fraudato, pro capite numerant); so he had to fear
the fate which, according to Plutarch (Cato 4), befell the age-worn herdsmen and other slaves of the elder Cato, viz. of being sold for a trifle as
useless encumbrances, a practice which Plut. strongly condemns.
buying of freedom by farmslaves is referred to in Verg. E. i 32; cf. also
Tac. A. xiv 42, Pedanium Secundum servus ipsius interfecit, seu negata
libertate cui pretium pepigerat, etc.
The
quam imperium adeptum orabat: orare with two accusatives is not
class., unless the acc. of the thing is a neut. pron. (Kühner-Stegmann, i
299). See on “flagitassent,” Vitell. 14, 2.
vulpem pilum mutare non mores: cf. Paul. Diac. (Migne 20 col. 715)
Sed vulpecula fuit semper fraudibus studens: ingenium suum mutare
nescit. The Greeks had the same proverb of the wolf: ὁ λύκος τὴν τρίχα,
οὐ τὴν γνώμην ἀλλάττει. Otto (Sprichwörter der Röm.) gives as the German
proverb "Der Fuchs wechselt den Balg und bleibt ein Schalk." Cf. also
Pindar, Ol. x 20 : τὸ γὰρ ἐμφυὲς οὔτ᾽ αἴθων ἀλώπηξ | οὔτ᾽ ἐρίβρομοι λέοντες διαλλάξαιντο ἦθος. A. A. Howard (Harv. Stud. x 28) suggests that there may
have been some fable in the style and metre (iambic senarii) of Phaedrus in
which were the words [Fabula haec] Vulpem pilum mutare non mores
[docet], or in a direct form Vulpes pilum mutare non mores [potest].
manubias: in ordinary speech, especially under the Empire, manubiae
was often a mere synonym of praeda either in the sense of booty taken
in war, or in the figurative sense of spoil or plunder of any kind. In the
latter sense Suet. uses it also in Calig. 41, 1, ne quod non manubiarum
genus experiretur, lupanar in Palatio constituit: Ner. 38, 3, ne non hinc
(i.e. from the burning of Rome) quoque quantum posset praedae et manubiarum invaderet. When used of booty taken in war, manubiae and praeda
were originally distinct. Gellius (xiii 25, 26) says that manubiae meant
money obtained from the sale of booty (praeda): nam praeda dicitur
corpora ipsa rerum quae capta sunt, manubiae vero appellatae sunt pecunia
a quaestore ex venditione praedae redacta. More probably, however,
Asconius (on Cic. Verr. ii 1, 154) is right in saying that manubiae meant
the general's share of the praeda: Manubiae sunt praeda imperatoris pro
portione de hostibus capta. The booty was divided between the Roman
treasury, the soldiers, and the general. The general usually devoted his
share to public buildings; e.g. Suet. Iul. 26, 2, Forum de manubiis incohavit: Tib. 20, Dedicavit et Concordiae aedem, item Pollucis et Castoris
... de manubiis: Aug. 30, 1, vias triumphalibus viris ex manubiali pecunia
sternendas distribuit. See Daremberg-Saglio, iii 1582.
inopia: for the combination of two or more
necessitate compulsum
ablatives in Suet. see App. i. § 3. D. f.
aerarii fiscique: fiscus originally denoted a basket in which money was
stored in the public treasury, as opposed to cista a private money-chest.
Under the principate the title fiscus or fiscus Caesaris (see on Vitell. 2, 2)
was given to the emperor's own treasury or privy purse, supplied mainly
by the revenues from the imperial provinces, certain dues from the
senatorial provinces, the confiscated goods of condemned criminals (bona
damnatorum) and lapsed inheritances (bona vacantia); out of it were met
the costs of provincial administration, the army and navy, the corn-supply,
etc. Distinct from the fiscus was the aerarium (or aerarium Saturni from
its old office in the temple of Saturn in the Forum); this was the public
treasury, which in theory was controlled by the senate but in practice by
the emperor (Dio liii 16, λόγῳ μὲν γὰρ τὰ δημόσια ἀπὸ τῶν ἐκείνου ἀπεκέκριτο,
ἔργῳ δὲ καὶ ταῦτα πρὸς τὴν γνώμην αὐτοῦ ἀνηλίσκετο). The aerarium paid for
public worship, public festivals, public buildings, roads, etc. There was a
third treasury, the aerarium militare which supplied army pensions; it was
instituted by Augustus and received the imposts on inheritances (vicesima
hereditatum) and on sales (centesima rerum venalium). See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii3 998 sqq.
=
quadringenties milies: sc. centena milia sestertium, 40,000,000,000
sesterces, about £340,000,000. Budaeus would reduce this colossal sum by
reading quadragies, which is approved by Oudendorp and others. Mommsen
(op. cit. ii³ 1010) also suspects some corruption in the figures. Humbert
(Les Finances chez les Romains i 211, 287) holds that this vast amount was
not a capital debt but an annual deficit in the revenue required to meet
the necessary expenses of the State. On the other hand, Marquardt
(Staatsv. ii² 297) regards it not as an annual revenue but as a sum required
once for all to stabilize the finances: "Eine jährliche Einnahme scheint
auch hier nicht gemeint zu sein, da der ganze Schatz, den Tiberius nach
einer habsüchtigen Regierung zurückliess, nur 2700 Mill. HS betrug (Suet.
Calig. 37), sondern eine Summe, die ein für allemal nöthig war, um die
Finanzen zu reguliren." Schiller (l.c.) summarizes the calculations on
which Vesp. based his estimate: "Natürlich war hierunter nicht nur der
laufende Bedarf und die Ansammlung eines Staatsschatzes mit gerechnet,
sondern namentlich die kostspieligen Bauherstellungen von Tempeln und
öffentlichen Bauten, die Ergänzung der öffentlichen Dienerschaft, die
enormen Ausgaben für Magazin- und Fuhrwesen, welches für die Getreideversorgung Italiens nötig war, aber auch die grossen Summen, welche für
militärische Zwecke, Strassen-, Festungs- und Flottenbauten, Verabscheidung und Neuerrichtung von Legionen aufzuwenden waren." See
also Herzog, Röm. Staatsverfassung ii 296.
ut res p. stare posset: for this use of stare (opp. to cadere, concidere,
ruere, corruere) cf. Oth. 5, 1, neque enim dissimulabat, nisi principem se
stare non posse, nihilque referre ab hoste in acie an in Foro sub creditoribus
caderet: Cic. Cat. ii 10, 21, qui in vetere aere alieno vacillant
si
stare non possunt, corruant: Cic. Phil. ii 10, quae si valuissent, res publica
staret, tu tuis flagitiis concidisses: Liv. xxiii 48, nisi fide staret res
publica, opibus non staturam (i.e. if the State were not supported by
credit, it would not be able to support itself by its present resources).
quando: apart from the indef. si quando (4 instances) Suetonius uses
quando in a temporal sense only twice: Galb. 15, 1 (as a conjunction),
Dom. 17, 1 (as an interrog. adv.). He uses it 15 times (excluding
quotations) in a causal sense; 10 times with the subjunctive, 5 times with
the indicative. This causal sense is frequent in Livy; otherwise mostly
poet. and post-Aug.
male partis optime usus est: cf. the old proverb, Naev. Trag. 54
(Ribb.), male parta male dilabuntur, “ill got, ill spent": Plaut. Poen. 844,
male partum male disperit: Liv. ix, 9, male partam victoriam male perdiderunt. Ausonius (Caes. x) says of Vespasian: Quaerendi adtentus,
moderato commodus usu, | auget nec reprimit Vespasianus opes "Set upor
gathering, in reasonable spending generous, Vespasian increased his wealth,
not straitened it" (H. E. White).
CHAPTER 17.
in omne genus liberalissimus: so, too, Augustus ‘liberalitatem
omnibus ordinibus per occasiones frequenter exhibuit'' (Aug. 41, 1). Cf.
the use of liberalitas in Tac. and Suet. (Galb. 15, 1) in the concrete sense
of a gift bestowed by imperial favour.
explevit censum senatorium: under the Republic no property qualification was legally necessary for a senator, but wealth was taken into
consideration in elections to the senate (cf. Willems, Le Sénat i 189 sqq.;
Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 876; Tyrrell and Purser on Cic. Fam. xiii 5).
Augustus made a definite census or property qualification legally necessary.
According to Suet. (Aug. 41), he fixed it first at 800,000 sesterces (double
the qualification of an eques), and later at 1,200,000; he also made up the
amount for those who did not possess it (supplevitque non habentibus).
Dio (liv 17) says he raised it from 400,000 to 1,000,000. Mommsen (i3
498) thinks Dio's statement the more accurate with regard to the higher
figure (1,000,000 not 1,200,000), but considers it improbable that Augustus
had ever fixed the sum so low as 400,000, which would have equalised the
qualifications of senators and equites. Tacitus (A. ii 37) mentions that
Augustus presented Hortensius Hortalus, a grandson of the orator, with
1,000,000 sesterces to enable him to keep up senatorial rank, and Tiberius
gave the same amount to Propertius Celer for the same purpose (A. i 75).
Hadrian's generosity enabled certain bankrupt (decoctores) senators to
resume their position: Spart. Hadr. 7, senatoribus qui non vitio suo
decoxerant, patrimonium pro liberorum modo senatoriae professionis
explevit. For similar aid given by Antoninus Pius see Capitol. Anton.
Pius 9; Fronto ad L. Verum, 6. Other instances in Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10
134 sqq.
quingenis annuis sustentavit: Vespasian was following the example
of Nero in making these annual allowances; cf. Ner. 10, 1, senatorum
nobilissimo cuique, sed a re familiari destituto, annua salaria et quibusdam
quingena constituit: Tac. A. xiii 34, sed nobili familiae honor auctus est
oblatis in singulos annos quingenis sestertiis, quibus Messala paupertatem
innoxiam sustentaret. Aurelio quoque Cottae et Haterio Antonino annuam
pecuniam statuit princeps (Nero), quamvis per luxum avitas opes dissipassent.
per totum orbem
restituit: Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, per omnes terras,
qua ius Romanum est, renovatae urbes cultu egregio. The names of the
cities restored by Vespasian are not recorded. There are only a few inscriptions which mention buildings of his in the provinces, e.g. one at
Seleucia in Syria (C.I.L. iii 6702, Newton, 103) and one at Patara in Lycia
(Le Bas 1265, Newton 14). A considerable number of inscriptions, principally on milestones, show that he constructed roads and bridges throughout the provinces; see Newton p. 57 sqq., Pauly-Wissowa vi 2690.
civitates terrae motu afflictas: we only know that Vespasian restored
the temple of Rhea, Mother of the Gods, at Herculaneum after that town,
together with Pompeii, had been partly destroyed by an earthquake either
in 62 (Tac. 4. xv 22) or '63 (Sen. N.Q. vi 1, 2); cf. C.I.L. x 1406, Newton
100: Imp. Caesar Vespasianus Aug., pontif. max., trib. pot. vii, imp. xvii,
p.p., cos. vii, design. viii, templum Matris Deum, terrae motu conlapsum,
restituit (this was found at Herculaneum in Campania; its date is MarchJune, 76). In 79 an earthquake destroyed three cities in Cyprus; cf.
Euseb.-Hieron. Chron., p. 159 Schoene, Tres civitates Cypri terrae motu
conruerunt. Earthquakes, especially in Asia Minor, occurred with great
frequency in the first two centuries of the Empire; see Friedlaender,
Sitteng. iii¹º 29. Augustus (Mon. Ancyr. vi 4) mentions that he had given
countless gifts (dona innumerabilia) to cities in Italy and the provinces
destroyed by fire and earthquake. In 17 A.D. a great earthquake wrecked
twelve famous cities in Asia Minor and Tiberius gave generous grants to
restore them; cf. A. ii 47: Suet. Tib. 48, 2, Ne provincias quidem liberalitate ulla sublevavit, excepta Asia, disiectis terrae motu civitatibus.
Examples of grants made to cities destroyed by fire are that of 10 million
sesterces to Bononia (Bologna) in 53 A.D. under Claudius (Tac. A. xii 58),
and that of 4 million sesterces to Lugdunum (Lyons) in 65 under Nero
(4. xvi 13).
CHAPTER 18.
ingenia
fovit: Augustus had set the example; cf. Aug. 89, 3, ingenia saeculi sui omnibus modis fovit. For ingenia (= homines ingeniosi)
cf. Tac. Agr. 2, monumenta clarissimorum ingeniorum in comitio
urerentur: Sen. Suas. vi 22, candidissimus omnium magnorum ingeniorum aestimator T. Livius: Verg. G. ii 382, praemiaque ingeniis pagos
et compita circum | Thesidae posuere. Among the successors of Vespasian
who fostered the liberal arts were Hadrian (Spart. Hadr. 16), Antoninus
Pius (Capitol. Anton. 11), and Alexander Severus (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 44);
see Dill, Rom. Society from Nero to M. Aurelius p. 148.
fisco: see on c. 16, 3.
Latinis Graecisque rhetoribus: Quintilian was the first to fill the
Chair of Latin Rhetoric endowed by Vespasian at Rome; he may have
held it from 72-92 A.D., the period of his greatest fame being 85-89
(Petersen, Quintil. x, Introd. p. viii). By the middle of the 2nd cent.
not only the large cities but also many of the smaller towns in Italy and
the provinces had such professors appointed by the communities (Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii10 192; Marquardt, Privatl.2 111, Staatsv. ii² 106).
Rhetoric at Rome was originally taught by Greeks and in Greek. There
was a strong conservative prejudice against Latin rhetores teaching in
Latin, and they were sternly discountenanced by an edict of the censors
in 92 B.c. (Gell. xv 11, 2; Suet. Rhet. 1). Gradually, however, from the
time of Cicero's youth they succeeded in establishing themselves, and both
Latin and Greek teachers of rhetoric were numerous at Rome in the
1st cent. of the Empire.
annua: annuum as a subst. (= quod praestatur quotannis or salarium)
is found first in Sen. Ben. i 9, 4, alienae uxori annuum praestat; cf. Suet.
Gramm. 23, quanquam ex schola quadringena annua caperet: Juv. vi 480,
sunt quae tortoribus annua praestent: Plin. Ep. x 40, publici servi annua
accipiunt.
centena: sc. sestertia, 100,000 sesterces, about £850.
poetas: e.g. the poet Saleius Bassus; cf. Tac. Dial. 9, laudavimus
nuper, ut miram et eximiam, Vespasiani libéralitatem, quod quingenta
sestertia Basso donasset. For eulogies and invocations of Vespasian by
poets see Sil. Ital. Pun. iii 594 sqq., Val. Flacc. Arg. i 8 sqq. The
unprofitable nature of poetical pursuits at Rome and the liberality of the
emperors to poets are discussed by Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 234 sqq.
Coae Veneris: this brilliant emendation of the corruptions coevenerit,
coemerit, coemit, is due to Graevius. It is uncertain whether Suetonius is
referring to a picture or a statue. The "Aphrodite Anadyomene" of
Apelles (ft. 336-323 в.с.), the most celebrated of Grecian painters, was
originally in the temple of Aesculapius at Cos, and was brought to Rome
to adorn the temple of Julius Caesar by Augustus, who in return remitted
100 talents of Coan tribute (Strab. xiv p. 657). Pliny (N.H. xxxv 91) says
that when the lower part was injured no one could be found to restore
(reficere) it, and when in course of time the panel of the picture fell into
decay, Nero substituted for it a copy made by Dorotheos (aliam pro ea
substituit Nero Dorothei manu); E. Sellers (The Elder Pliny's Chapters
on the History of Art, p. 128) comments on this: "substituit may be an
exaggeration, as the picture of Apelles seems still to have been in existence
under Vespasian, when Suetonius speaks of its being again restored."
Pliny goes on to mention that Apelles had begun another Aphrodite at
Cos, intending to surpass even the fame of his earlier work, but at his
death no one was found to finish the outlines already traced. Graevius
thought that Suetonius is referring to this incomplete picture. Oudendorp
and Baumg.-Cr. are more probably right in holding that the restoration
mentioned here was of the statue of Venus, by an unknown sculptor,
which was placed by Vesp. in his temple of Peace. Pliny (xxxvi 5) says:
Ignoratur artifex eius quoque Veneris, quam Vespasianus Imperator in
operibus Pacis suae dicavit, antiquorum dignam fama. If this view is
correct, we must assume that the statue came from Cos. Other readings
which have been suggested are scenae (to be taken with artifices), Lipsius;
coronavit, Böttiger.
Colossi: this colossal statue of Nero by Zenodorus was 120 feet in
height, and stood originally in the vestibule of Nero's Aurea Domus (see
on Oth. 7, 1); it was removed by Vespasian to the Via Sacra; later
Hadrian placed it to the N.W. of the Colosseum, where the base is still
preserved. It was converted into a statue of the Sun (Plin. N.H. xxxiv 45),
apparently by Vespasian (see Friedlaender on Mart. Spect. 2, 1, Hic ubi
sidereus propius videt astra colossus). Spartianus (Hadr. 19) says that it
was Hadrian who consecrated it to the Sun after removing the features
of Nero, while Lampridius (Commod. 17) states that Commodus replaced.
the head of Nero by his own. See also Dio lxvi 15, lxxii 22.
congiario: a congiarium (from congius a measure of about 6 pints)
was originally a distribution of free oil or wine among the plebs. Under
the Empire we find it used of a largess of money to the people, while
donativum meant a similar gift to the soldiers; e.g. Ner. 7, 2, populo
congiarium, militi donativum proposuit.
The word was also used in a
general sense for a gift, especially of money, as here and in Iul. 27, 1,
vel invitatos vel sponte ad se commeantes uberrimo congiario prosequebatur; cf. Cic. Att. x 7, 3: Sen. Ep. 29, 5: Quintil. vi 3, 52: Mart. iii
7,2, Centum miselli iam valete quadrantes | anteambulonis congiarium
(= sportula) lassi.
mechanico: mechanicus and machinator are both found answering to
the Gr. μηχανοποιός. According to Daremberg-Saglio (iii 1663) machinatores were Roman citizens, generally military engineers, while the term
mechanici was originally applied to foreigners, slaves or freedmen, mainly
Greeks who brought in with them the designation mechanicus (μηχανικός),
which occurs in ante-class. and post-Aug. writers (first in Lucilius of an
equilibrist, petaurista, who performed by the aid of mechanical appliances;
later of architects and engineers of various kinds).
grandes columnas perducturum: mechanical contrivances for the
conveyance of columns are described in Vitruvius x 2 and illustrated in
Daremberg-Saglio iii 1467.
in Capitolium: for the restitutio Capitolii see c. 8, 5.
plebeculam: Ihm reads plebiculam, which has better support but seems
a doubtful form, perhaps due to a confusion with plebicola. The
diminutive was probably used by Vespasian in a merely pitying way;
but elsewhere it is contemptuous, e.g. Cic. Att. i 16, illa contionalis hirudo
aerarii, misera ac ieiuna plebecula: ib. xvi 8: Hor. Ep. ii 1, 186,
his nam plebecula gaudet: Pers. iv 6. Wilkins, on Hor. l.c., suggests
that Suetonius puts the word in the mouth of Vespasian as "a specimen
of the rough language of the low-born emperor."
pascere: by allowing only manual labour to be used, and so giving
more employment.
CHAPTER 19.
ludis: at the games to celebrate the original dedication of this theatre
Augustus met with a slight mishap: Aug. 43, 5, commissione (i.e. at the
opening) ludorum, quibus theatrum Marcelli dedicabat, evenit ut laxatis
sellae curulis compagibus caderet supinus.
Marcelliani theatri: Marcellus, son of Octavia sister of Augustus,
and adopted son of Augustus, died in 23 B.C., at the age of 20; cf. Verg.
Aen. vi 883 sqq., Prop. iii 18. In 44 в.с. Julius Caesar had projected and
laid the foundations of a huge theatre (it afterwards held 10,000) which
Augustus completed and called after Marcellus; cf. Iul. 44, 1, destinabat
..
extruere theatrum summae magnitudinis Tarpeio monti accubans:
Dio xliii 49, θέατρόν τέ τι κατὰ τὸν Πομπήιον (i.e. as Pompey had done)
οἰκοδομῆσαι ἐθελήσας προκατεβάλετο μέν, οὐκ ἐξετέλεσε δέ. ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν ὁ
Αὔγουστος μετὰ ταῦτα ἐκποιήσας ἀπὸ Μάρκου Μαρκέλλου τοῦ ἀδελφιδοῦ ἐπωνόμασε:
Mon. Ancyr. 21, Theatrum ad aedem Apollinis in solo magna ex parte a
privatis empto feci, quod sub nomine M. Marcelli generi mei esset: Suet.
Aug. 29, 4, quaedam etiam opera sub nomine alieno . . fecit, ut .. theatrum
Marcelli. The building was so far advanced in 17 B.C. that there was a
performance given in it at the Ludi Saeculares, and it was finished and
dedicated in 13 B.с. (Dio liv 26) or 11 в.с. (Plin. N.H. viii 65). It suffered
damage in 69 A.D. at the storming and burning of the Capitol by the
Vitellians. Martial (x 51, 11) mentions it among the most conspicuous
buildings of Rome. For its subsequent history and the extant remains in
the Via del Teatro di Marcello (between the S.W. end of the Capitoline
and the Tiber) see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Rom i 3, 516 sqq.
acroamata: acroāma (ἀκρόαμα) means a thing heard, especially music,
also plays, recitations, entertainments of any kind. The performer or
"artiste” was also called acroama (e.g. Cic. Sest. 116, of an actor: Nep.
Att. 14, of an anagnostes or reader); cf. the description of the dinners of
Augustus, Aug. 74, ad communionem sermonis tacentes vel summissim
fabulantes provocabat, et aut acromata et histriones aut etiam triviales ex
circo ludios (i.e. strolling players from the circus) interponebat ac
frequentius aretalogos (i.e. story-tellers). Pliny, Ep. vi 31, 13, mentions
acroamata at Trajan's dinner-parties. See Marquardt, Privatl.2 337;
Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 176.
Apellae: the MSS. have appellari, apellari, apelli. The reading in
the text is a correction by Bücheler. Apollinari is read in Ed. Rom. ii
and most subsequent editions; Roth and Preud'homme adopt Politian's
Apellari; but nothing is known of any actor named Apollinaris or Apellaris.
Apelles may possibly be the Apelles of Ascalon, a famous tragic actor,
who was at first an intimate friend and favourite of the emperor Caligula
(Dio lix 5), but later, as Suetonius tells us, he had a painful experience
of Caligula's eccentricity: Calig. 33, Inter varios iocos, cum assistens
simulacro Iovis Apellen tragoedum consuluisset uter illi maior videretur,
cunctantem flagellis discidit conlaudans subinde vocem deprecantis quasi
etiam in gemitu praedulcem. Apelles is referred to in Petron. Satyr. 64
as a peerless actor: Quando parem habui nisi unum ("the one and only'")
Apelletem? The difficulty lies in assuming that this Apelles was still
acting in the reign of Vespasian, 30 years after his maltreatment by
Caligula.
quadringenta sestertia: about £3,400.
Terpno: Terpnus was a famous citharoedus who taught Nero to play
upon the cithara and to sing to it (Ner. 20, 1). He was one of those in
the train of Nero on his musical tour to the Greek contests (see Vesp. 4, 4)
and competed unsuccessfully against the emperor (Dio lxiii 8). Apollonius
of Tyana, according to Philostratus (v 7), spoke scornfully of Nero's
doffing the robes of Augustus and Julius in order to don those of a
Terpnus at the festivals in Greece.
Diodoro: Diodorus also was defeated by Nero at the Greek musical
contests. He had the honour of riding with Nero in the triumphal car
when the emperor entered Rome after his "victories" in Greece (Dio lxiii
20).
=
super: praeter; see on c. 24.
coronas aureas: in Ner. 53 we read of the scaenicae coronae which
Nero won by his victories on the stage. The custom of rewarding actors
with golden crowns must have been common in the later days of the
Republic, as Plutarch (Cat. min. 46) says that Cato cut down the expenses
of official theatrical entertainments by giving the players crowns not of
gold but of wild olive like the prizes at Olympia. Varro (L.L. v 178)
mentions "corollae in scaena dari solitae cum placuerant actores," but
does not specify the material. Pliny (N.H. xxxiv 94) states that actors'
crowns of bronze, if dyed with ox-gall, present the appearance of gold.
Sometimes a successful actor was awarded a corollarium, which was a
wreath of bronze leaves silvered or gilded (cf. Plin. N.H. xxi 5: Merrill
on Plin. Ep. vii 24). A golden olive-crown was the prize at the musical
contest (agon) held by Domitian at his Alban villa (cf. Stat. Silv. iii 5,
28, etc.). See Dom. 4, 4.
convivabatur: "gave dinner parties"; cf. Aug. 74, convivabatur
assidue nec umquam nisi recta: Iul. 48, convivatum assidue per provincias:
Dom. 21, convivabatur frequenter ac large, sed paene raptim: Claud. 32,
convivia agitavit et ampla et assidua: Tit. 7, 2, convivia instituit iucunda
magis quam profusa.
recta: sc. cenâ, a regular formal dinner of successive courses (fercula,
lit. 'trays'"). The smallest number of courses was three, viz. the gustatio
(hors d'oeuvres), cena, and secunda mensa (dessert). At times Augustus
had six (Aug. 74) and Juvenal (i 94) mentions fercula septem, these
numbers being made up by subdividing the second of the three old courses
(the cena) into prima cena, altera cena, tertia cena, etc. A cena recta
was opposed to a mere sportula or distribution of portions of food to
clients; cf. Mart. viii 50, 10, promissa est nobis sportula, recta data est.
See on Dom. 7, 1, sportulas publicas sustulit revocata rectarum cenarum
consuetudine.
dapsile: this form of the adv. occurs in Pompon. Atell. 161, verrem
sume dapsile; Naevius (com. 39 R.) has dapsiliter suos amicos alit; Lucilius
(xxx 55 M.) uses the comparative, qui invitavit dapsilius se. The adj.
dapsilis (δαψιλής) is found in Plautus, e.g. Aulul. 167, dotes dapsiles
(dapsilas, Nonius), and in post-Aug. authors. See Neue - Wagener,
Formenlehre ii 150, 687.
macellarios: "market-vendors"; cf. Iul. 26, 2, quae ad epulum pertinerent, quamvis macellariis ablocata ("let out on contract"), etiam
domesticatim apparabat. The subst. is found earlier in Varr. R.R. iii 2, 11;
4, 2. Macellum (μάκελλον) is connected with the Hebr. mikhela, makhela
""enclosure.'" The first macellum at Rome was built in 179 в.с., and was
replaced under Augustus by the macellum Liviae. In order to enforce his
sumptuary laws, Julius Caesar had guards placed to prevent the sale of
forbidden dainties in the macellum (Iul. 43), and Tiberius proposed that
the prices in the macellum should be revised annually by the senate, to
check profiteering, e.g. the sale of mullets (mulli) at 10,000 sesterces apiece
(Tib. 34).
dabat Saturnalibus apophoreta: apophoreta (ἀποφορητά) was the word
used for the presents which guests received at table to take home with
them, especially during the festival of the Saturnalia (Dec. 17-23). The
name is familiar as the title of the 14th book of Martial's Epigrams,
which consists of distichs, like mottoes, to accompany such presents, which
were either cheap (e.g. nuts) or costly (e.g. works of art); in the introductory epigram Martial associates them with the Saturnalia. Augustus
gave these presents; cf. Aug. 75, Saturnalibus, et si quando alias libuisset,
modo munera dividebat, vestem et aurum et argentum, etc. Tiberius sent
Claudius "quadraginta aureos in Saturnalia et Sigillaria” (Claud. 5).
Caligula gave 2,000,000 sesterces "in apophoretis" to the charioteer
Eutychus (Calig. 55). The Schol. on Juv. vi 202 says that apophoreta
were given at weddings: solebant enim antea per nuptias recedentibus
dulcia (sweetmeats or cakes) erogare pro apophoretis.
per Kal. Mart.: = singulis Kalendis Martiis. For the change of constr.
from Saturnalibus to per Kal. Mart. cf. Iul. 16, 1, vi ac per arma: Sall.
Iug. 7, per vim atque insidiis: Tac. H. ii 77, per fastidium ac contumacia.
See also App. i. § 15. d. On the 1st of March, "the New Year's day of
the Roman religious calendar," the matrons celebrated the festival of the
Matronalia in honour of Juno Lucina whose temple on the Esquiline was
dedicated on that day, probably in 379 B.C. (see Warde Fowler, Rom. Fest.
p. 38). Ovid (Fast. iii 229 sqq.) describes the origin and nature of the
festival; cf. Hor. C. iii 8, Martiis caelebs quid agam Kalendis? For the
custom of making presents to women at the Matronalia cf. Juv. ix 53,
munera femineis tractat secreta Kalendis: Plaut. Mil. 690, da mihi, vir,
Kalendis: Tibullus (Lygdamus) iii 1: Mart. v 84 (where Martial describes
the Martiae Kalendae as the women's Saturnalia). See Marquardt,
Staatsv. iii² 571 sq.
cupiditatis infamia: see on c. 16, 1.
§ 2. Alexandrini: Dio (lxvi 8) says that the Alexandrians taunted
Vespasian with being avaricious enough to exact even so petty a sum as
six obols (about 9d.), a taunt to which Vesp. replied by promptly levying
six obols from each of the inhabitants of the city. Dio also says that
they regarded Vesp. as ignorant of how to act like a Caesar (Καισαρεύειν)
i.e. to be prodigally lavish like Nero. The Alexandrians were notorious
for their pungent criticisms of their rulers; cf. Herodian iv 9, 2, πεφύκασι
δέ πως εἶναι φιλοσκώμμονες, καὶ λέγειν εὐστόχως ὑπογραφὰς ἢ παιδιάς, ἀπορριπτοῦντες
ἐς τοὺς ὑπερέχοντας πολλὰ χαρίεντα μὲν αὐτοῖς δοκοῦντα, λυπηρὰ δὲ τοῖς σκωφθεῖσι:
Sen. Cons. ad Helv. 19, itaque loquax et ingeniosa in contumelias praefectorum provincia, in qua etiam qui vitaverunt culpam, non effugerunt
infamiam. For Vespasian's new taxation at Alexandria see on c. 16, 1.
Dio
Cybiosacten: this reading was restored by Torrentius for cybiotanten
of the MSS. Strabo (xvii 796) says that after the expulsion of Ptolemy
Auletes in 58 B.C. the Alexandrians made his daughter Berenice queen,
and as husband for her they brought in from Syria a certain Cybiosactes
(Κυβιοσάκτης τις) who claimed descent from the royal house of Syria;
Berenice, however, murdered him in a few days, οὐ φέρουσα τὸ βάναυσον καὶ
τὸ ἀνελεύθερον (cum eius sordes illiberalitatemque ferre non posset).
(xxxix 57) gives the name of Berenice's husband as Seleucus; it is doubtful whether he was a son or a bastard son of Antiochus X (see Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Seleukos). Sturz, Dial. Mac. et Alex. 77, explains κυβιοσάκτης
as "salsamentarius, qui salsamenta componit et vendit.”
κύβιον (cybium)
was the flesh of the pelamys, or tunny-fish, cut up into dice-shaped pieces
and salted (Plin. N.H. xxxii 146, 151; Athen. iii 116, 118); σάττειν
properly meant “onus iumento imponere," as is done by itinerant vendors,
and so κυβιοσάκτης is the same as ταριχέμπορος or ταριχοπώλης (Casaubon on
Strab. l.c.). salsamentarii, salt-fish vendors, were held in contempt at
Rome; cf. Auct. ad Herenn. iv 54, Suet. vit. Horat. 1.
Favor: as an actor's name this is found frequently in inscriptions
(Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2078).
archimimus: the director and principal actor in the company (grex)
which performed a mimus or loosely constructed character-sketch of
common life. These mimi were notorious for their vulgarity and
immorality; see Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 113 sqq. The number of the
company varied with the piece, and female parts were played by women.
The one word mimus is used both for the actor and for the piece. The
term archimimus occurs also in Sen. frag. 36, doctus archimimus, senex iam
decrepitus, cotidie in Capitolio mimum agebat: Porphyr. (on Hor. S. ii 6,
7'2), archimimus iucunde et molliter et saltaret et eloqueretur: Dig. xxxviii
1, 25: C.I.L. iii 7343, etc. The fem. archimima is also found, C.I.L. vi
10107.
personam eius ferens: this seems to be the only passage where we
are told that it was customary for a mask of the deceased to be worn
at his funeral by an actor, though we often hear of the imagines or wax-
2G
masks of distinguished ancestors (see on c. 1, 1) being worn in the funeral
procession (e.g. Polyb. vi 53, Plin. N.H. xxxv 6). In the illustrations
which we have of Etruscan funeral processions the deceased is depicted as
playing an active part, and according to Martha, Art étrusque pp. 417 sqq.,
the deceased was represented in the procession by a mannequin or an actor
(Daremberg-Saglio, ii 1383). In a triumphal procession an actor attired
in all the splendour of the triumphator provided amusement to the populace
by his imitations of the victorious general trampling or dancing(ἐπορχούμενος,
insultans) on his foes (App. Рип. 66).
pompa: the pompa funebris or funeral procession was organised by
the funeral-marshals (dissignatores) after the fashion of the pоmра
circensis or pompa triumphalis. It was headed by musicians (tibicines,
tubicines, siticines, cornicines), followed in the old days by praeficae or
women chanting dirges (naeniae), who were later replaced by choirs of
men. After them came dancers and actors; then the wearers of the
imagines, each attired in the robe of the office held by the ancestor whom
he represented, and driving in a car of state preceded by the appropriate
number of lictors. After them came bearers of crowns, spoils, and other
records of victories and triumphs won by the deceased. The procession
was closed by torch-bearers and lictors with fasces reversed; these pre-.
ceded the bier which in the case of emperors was borne by magistrates
and senators (Suet. Iul. 84, Aug. 100). See Marquardt, Privatl.2 353 sqq.
sestertium centiens: = centiens centena milia sestertium, 10,000,000
sesterces, about £85,000. Nero was buried at a cost of 200,000 sesterces
(Ner. 50).
exclamavit
proicerent: apparently the Romans did not regard as
unseemly at an emperor's funeral such an exhibition of the licence which
had become familiar on the stage. In the later days of the Republic
mimi were allowed great freedom in the way of political allusion (cf. Cic.
Att. xiv 3, populi ἐπισημασίαν et mimorum dicta perscribito). Laberius
revenged himself on the dictator Caesar, for compelling him to act in his
own mimes, by the two famous lines “Porro Quirites! libertatem perdimus''
and "Necesse est multos timeat quem multi timent" (Macrob. Sat. ii 7).
The audience were quick to detect allusions to the alleged effeminacy of
Augustus and the debauchery of Tiberius at Capri (Suet. Aug. 68, Tib. 45).
Caligula buried alive a composer of Atellanae for a double entendre
reflecting on him (Calig. 27). Nero's poisoning of Claudius, his attempt
to drown Agrippina, and likewise the harshness and avarice of Galba
were hinted at upon the stage (Ner. 39, Galb. 13). Helvidius Priscus was
executed by Domitian for making his farce (exodium) entitled “Paris
and Oenone" a satire on the emperor's divorce (Dom. 10, 4). Further
examples are given by Friedlaender (l.c.).
in Tiberim: cf. Tib. 75, 1, morte eius ita laetatus est populus, ut ad
primum nuntium discurrentes “Tiberium in Tiberium!”” clamitarent.
The body of the emperor Elagabalus was thrown into the Tiber (Lamprid.
Heliog. c. 17). See also Vitell. 17, 2.
CHAPTER 20.
statura fuit quadrata: quadratus as applied to the build of men or
other animals meant well-proportioned, not too long or too short, and not
too plump or too spare; this is shown by Celsus ii 1, corpus habilissimum
quadratum est, neque gracile neque obesum; nam longa statura, ut in
iuventute decora est, sic matura senectute conficitur, gracile corpus infirmum,
obesum hebes est. Columella (vii 12) says that a dog for guarding a
farmhouse (villaticus canis) should be “quadratus potius quam longus aut
brevis"; while a dog for guarding cattle (pecuarius canis) should possess
a "status longior productiorque
quam brevis aut etiam quadratus.”
The Greek τετράγωνος is used metaph. of those who stand four-square,
well-balanced in body and mind.
•
compactis membris: "with well-knit limbs"; cf. Plin. Ep. vii 24,
compacto corpore et robusto: Pallad. iv 11, 2, (sint boves) cervice torosa
atque compacta.
urbanorum: "wits"; cf. Domitius Marsus (ap. Quintil. vi 3, 105):
Urbanus homo erit, cuius multa bene dicta responsaque erunt; et qui in
sermonibus, circulis, conviviis, item in contionibus, omni denique loco
ridicule commodeque dicet. The opposite of urbanitas is rusticitas:
Quintil. vi 3, 17, urbanitas
. qua quidem significari video sermonem praeferentem in verbis et sono et usu proprium quendam gustum urbis et
sumptam ex conversatione doctorum tacitam eruditionem, denique cui contraria sit rusticitas. Gr. ἀστεῖος opp. to ἄγροικος.
siquidem: see on Dom. 6, 2.
ut in se aliquid diceret: cf. Cic. Phil. ii 17, 42, At vero adhibes ioci
causa magistrum, suffragio tuo et compotorum tuorum rhetorem, cui concessisti ut in te quae vellet diceret, salsum omnino hominem, sed materia
facilis est in te et in tuos dicta dicere. Cicero uses dicta dicere "to utter
witticisms (mots)" also in Planc. 85, de or. ii 244; so dicax (from dico)
"witty." in does not mean "against," but “on” “concerning"; see
Holden on Cic. Off. i 28.
cum ventrem exonerare desieris: the same jest on a person who had
a strained look occurs in Mart. iii 89: Utere lactucis, et mollibus utere
malvis: | nam faciem durum, Phoebe, cacantis habes (cf. id. x 48, 7,
Exoneraturas ventrem mihi villica malvas | attulit).
valitudine prosperrima usus est: but he was gouty, for Dio (lxvi 17)
says that his last illness was not his "accustomed gout" but a fever
(νοσήσας οὐ τῇ ποδάγρᾳ τῇ συνήθει ἀλλὰ πυρετοῖς).
•
fauces defricaret: fricare, fricatio, frictio, and their compounds
are very often used of massage, friction, either dry or with unguents
which are rubbed in; see Thes. Ling. Lat., where abundant instances are
cited from Pliny N.H. and medical writers like Celsus, Serenus Sammonicus,
and Scribonius Largus.
=
ad numerum: certo finitoque numero (Baumg.-Cr.); cf. Cels. ii 14,
neque audiendi sunt qui numero finiunt, quoties aliquis perfricandus sit:
id enim ex viribus hominis colligendum est; et si is perinfirmus est, potest
2G2
satis esse quinquagies, si robustior, potest ducenties esse faciendum; inter
utrumque deinde, prout vires sunt.
sphaeristerio: in the last century of the Republic the Romans played
their games of ball in the open space of the Campus Martius (Hor. Sat. i 6,
126, Sen. Ep. 104), but under the Empire they preferred a closed-in court
for the purpose. These ball-courts formed part of every gymnasium and
were adjuncts of the various public baths at Rome. Private mansions
possessed them, and the younger Pliny had a sphaeristerium (σφαιριστήριον)
close to the baths in both his elaborate country-houses (Plin. Ep. ii 17, 12:
▼6, 27). The players stripped for the game; Pliny mentions an apodyterium or dressing-room in connexion with the sphaeristerium.
inediam unius diei: cf. Cels. vii 7, 4, abstinentia ("fasting'") unius
diei. The curative value of abstinence from food (λιμός, νηστεία, abstinentia,
inedia) is mentioned in the medical writers from Hippocrates on; e.g. Cels.
ii 16, neque ulla res magis adiuvat laborantem quam tempestiva abstinentia.
Hippocrates declared that privation (ἔνδεια) is the mother of health (ὑγιείας
μητήρ). Protracted inedia was a common means of suicide under the
Empire, e.g. in the case of Silius Italicus (Plin. Ep. iii 7); cf. Suet. Aug.
53, 3, inedia mori destinantem . ad vitam revocavit: Tib. 53, 2, mori
inedia destinanti, per vim ore diducto, infulciri cibum iussit.
interponeret: interponere is used in Celsus of introducing at intervals
certain changes of treatment, diet, etc.; e.g. iii 6, poteritque a balneo
etiam pinguius aut dulcius dari vinum; poterit semel aut bis interponi
Graecum salsum.
CHAPTER 21.
ordinem vitae: ordo denotes the systematic portioning out of each
day between the successive officia which have to be discharged; cf. Juv. 1
127, ipse dies pulchro distinguitur ordine rerum: Plin. Ep. iii 1 (of the
life of Spurinna), nihil est illo vitae genere distinctius (i.e. better distributed)
parva haec, parva, si non cotidie fiant, ordine quodam ac
velut orbe circumagit. “Ordinare diem” and “disponere diem” were
used for the methodical arrangement of one's day.
tenuit: so [Aur. Vict.] Εpit. 9, Institutum vero uniforme omni imperio
tenuit. Vigilare de nocte publicisque actibus absolutis caros admittere,
dum salutatur calceamenta sumens et regium vestitum. Post autem
negotiis, quaecumque advenissent, auditis exerceri vectatione, deinde
requiescere, postremo ubi lavisset, remissiore animo convivium curabat.
de nocte: "while it was still night." On this temporal use of de
see Kühner-Stegmann, i 498, where de die and de nocte are explained
"vom Tage her, von der Nacht her = noch bei Tage, am hellen Tage,
noch in der Nacht, in der Nacht"; cf. Ter. Ad. 840, Hor. Ep. i 2, 32, ut
iugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones.
officiorum: officia here is practically equivalent to "officials," a
meaning which we find more definitely in later Latin; e.g. [Treb. Poll.]
Gall. 17, cum iret ad hortos
omnia Palatina officia sequebantur. The
concrete use of officium appears in the younger Pliny; e.g. Ep. iii 12, erunt
officia antelucana (i.e. callers, salutatores, abroad before dawn), in quae
incidere impune ne Catoni quidem licuit: Pan. 76, ipsius officium (‘suite'')
tam modicum; cf. Juv. x 44, praecedentia longi | agminis officia ('attentive
clients''): Apul. Met. iv 31, marinum obsequium = dii marini obsequentes.
Abstracts like servitium, remigium, ministerium, are often used in a concrete sense; see Draeger, Hist. Synt. i² 22-24.
breviariis: ''summaries," "condensed reports." Seneca (Ep. 39) condemns breviarium as a barbarism: vide, ne plus profutura sit ratio ordinaria
quam haec, quae nunc vulgo breviarium dicitur, olim cum Latine loqueremur,
summarium vocabatur. Suetonius uses it also in Aug. 101, breviarium totius
imperii (called rationarium imperii in Aug. 28, 1): Galb. 12, 3 dispensatori
breviarium rationum offerenti: Gramm. 10, Ateius Sallustium breviario
rerum omnium Romanarum instruxit; cf. Plin. N.H. vii 97, xviii 230, and
the “Breviarium Historiae Romanae" by Eutropius. Cicero (Att. xiii 8,
etc.) uses epitome (ἐπιτομή) for an abridgement.
amicos admittebat: Dio (lxvi 10) describes the accessibility of
Vespasian. The door of his palace in the Sallustine Gardens stood open
all day long; no one was denied admission, senator or plebeian. His
intimate friends were admitted even while he was still in bed. The elder
Pliny used to visit him before dawn: Plin. Ep. iii 5, ante lucem ibat ad
Vespasianum imperatorem, nam ille quoque noctibus utebatur. Philostratus (vit. Apollon. v 31) describes Vespasian, while still at Alexandria,
as engaged on his correspondence long before dawn. Einhard in his Life
of Charlemagne (c. 24) imitates Suetonius very closely: cum calciaretur
et amiciretur, non tantum amicos admittebat, verum etiam, si comes palatii
litem aliquam esse diceret, quae sine eius iussu definiri non posset,
lite cognita sententiam dixit. See Introd. ii ad fin.
calciabat ipse se: persons of rank were usually assisted in their toilet
by numerous attendant slaves (see Marquardt, Privatl. 145); cubicularii
would put on their robes, and calciatores their shoes. Pliny (Ep. iii 16)
mentions the argument used by Arria when imploring the soldiers to allow
her to go on board the ship which was to bear her husband Thrasea Paetus
as a prisoner to Rome: “nempe enim,” inquit, “daturi estis consulari
viro servolos aliquos, quorum e manu cibum capiat, a quibus vestiatur, a
quibus calcietur: omnia sola praestabo.”
amiciebat: the only part of amicio used by the best writers is amictus
(sum).
post decisa
..
..
negotia: cf. Hor. Ep. i 7, 56 sqq., praeconem ...
et ludis et post decisa negotia Campo, a passage which
gaudentem
shows that decidere negotia could be used in the general sense of transacting
or completing any business, and not merely in the limited legal sense of
deciding or settling a case (e.g. Capitol. M. Antonin. Phil. 10, multis praetoriis et consularibus privatis decidenda negotia delegavit): it is in the
latter sense that the words of Suet. are understood in [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9,
quoted above.
gestationi: gestatio, which is a post-Aug. word, was used especially of
taking exercise either by being carried in a litter (lectica) or driving in
a carriage (cf. Galb. 8, 1). The word denoted not merely the exercise
itself but also the part of the grounds of Roman villas where the gestatio
took place (cf. Plin. Ep. ii 17, 13; v 6, 17). Seneca refers to the advantages
of gestatio as a form of exercise; Ep. 15, gestatio et corpus concutit et
In
studio non officit: possis legere, possis dictare, possis loqui, possis audire.
(Claudius even played at dice; Suet. Claud. 33, 2, solitus etiam in gestatione
aleam ludere, ita essedo alveoque adaptatis ne lusus confunderetur.)
Ep. 55 Seneca also mentions the tired feeling produced by the motion:
a gestatione
venio non minus fatigatus quam si tantum ambulassemi
quantum sedi.
Medical writers recommend gestatio; e.g. Cels. ii 15,
gestatio longis morbis aptissima est
genera autem gestationis plura
sunt: lenissima est navi vel in portu vel in flumine, vehementior vel in
alto, vel lectica, etiamnum acrior vehiculo.
quieti: i.e. the siesta (meridiatio).
pallacarum: the form pallaca (= Gr. παλλακή) is very rare, the only
other example cited being Plin. N.H. xxxv 86, dilectam sibi (i.e. Alexander
the Great) e pallacis suis praecipue, nomine Pancasten. The usual Lat.
word for a mistress or concubine is paelex (pellex), the derivation of
which is uncertain; see Walde, Lat. Etym. Wörterb.
Caenidis: see on c. 3.
a secreto: i.e. from the private apartment where he had been resting.
For secreto see on Oth. 3, 1.
balneum tricliniumque: bathing was a regular preliminary to dining,
e.g. Plin. Ep. vi 20, mox balneum, cena, somnus inquietus et brevis. The
usual time for the bath was the eighth hour or a little later; see on
Dom. 21.
ea momenta.. ad aliquid petendum
captabant: cf. Ov. Pont. iii 1,
129, eligito tempus, captatum saepe, rogandi: Liv. xxxiii 35, temporum
opportunitates captasse ad rebellandum.
CHAPTER 22.
et super cenam autem: for super cenam see on Tit. 8, 1; for the
position of autem see on Dom. 13, 33; for et autem followed by et cf.
Aug. 73, Et forensia autem et calceos habuit ad subitos casus parata.
et semper alias: this reading has been reasonably suspected, and the
variant super aleas (so Ts; super alias, PO) was approved by Casaubon
and read by Burman; Graevius, on the ground that the pl. aleas is indefensible, suggested aleam. The only example of the pl. of alea given
in the Thes. Ling. Lat. is Amm. xiv 6, 25, pugnaciter aleis certant.
Preud 'homme marks off the words et semper alias comissimus as a
parenthesis.
comissimus: com(m)unissimus (Ts) is read by the editors before
Roth; cf. Claud. 21, 5, nec ullo spectaculi genere communior ("more
familiar'") aut remissior erat. Torrentius preferred the reading cum
amicis given by one of his MSS.
multa ioco transigebat: i.e. he settled many matters by dismissing
them with a bon mot; cf. Hor. Sat. i 10, 14, ridiculum acri | fortius et
melius magnas plerumque secat res: Cic. de or. ii 236, odiosas res saepe,
quas argumentis dilui non facile est, ioco risuque dissolvit. Vespasian
could take a joke as well as make one: ἔσκωπτε δημοτικῶς, καὶ ἀντεσκώπτετο
ἡδέως (Dio lxvi 11).
praetextatis
verbis: this phrase for "obscene expressions" is very
obscure. It occurs also in Gell. N.A. ix 10, non praetextatis, sed puris
honestisque verbis, and in Macrob. Sat. ii 1, 9, impudica et praetextata
verba. The first of the two explanations given by Festus (p. 245 M.) is
rather on the "lucus a non lucendo" principle: praetextum (al. praetextatum) sermonem quidam putant dici, quod praetextatis (i.e. boys who
have not yet assumed the toga virilis) nefas sit obsceno verbo uti; alii,
quod nubentibus, depositis praetextis, a multitudine puerorum obscena (i.e.
Fescennina) clamentur. Freund explains praetextata verba as velata verba
"verblümte (i.e. disguised in flowery language) Worte": Forcellini says
"praetextata verba esse ea, quibus aliquid praefari vel praetexi debet
honoris causa, quemadmodum obscenis dictis 'honos sit auribus' praetexere solemne fuit." Juvenal (ii 170), describing Armenian envoys who
had been initiated in evil practices at Rome, has the line "Sic praetextatos
referunt Artaxata mores," which the Schol. explains "mores quos filii
senatorum intra urbem habent, obsides in suis patriis redeuntes reportant,
quos ceteri apud se ephebi discant'"; and praetextata verba is prob. to be
understood either of the foul language used by such young libertines, or
(as Gronovius on Gell. l.c. suggests) of the language which the seducers
of youth employed (verba quibus ad nequitiam sollicitarentur).
facetissima: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, ferebat patienter amicorum motus,
contumeliis eorum, ut erat facetissimus, iocularibus respondens.
Mestrium Florum: Lucius Mestrius Florus took part in the first
battle of Betriacum in 69 A.D. as an unwilling follower of Otho. It is
uncertain in what year he was consul. He was proconsul of Asia under
Domitian (prob. in 83/4), as is shown by coins of Smyrna and an inscription at Ephesus (see Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii p. 370). Plutarch made
his acquaintance in literary circles at Rome, and Florus accompanied him
through Cisalpine Gaul, showing him over the plain of Betriacum; cf.
Plut. Oth. 14. Florus is introduced by Plutarch in his Quaestiones Conviviales (1,9; 3, 3-5; 5, 7. 10; 7, 1. 2. 4. 6; 8, 1. 2. 10) as giving banquets
and taking part in discussions at table, the author describing him as an
antiquarian (φιλάρχαιος).
"plaustra" potius quam "plostra'': the emperor's speech displayed
rusticitas in this pronunciation of the word for wagons.
Lindsay (Lat.
Lang. p. 40) says: “o for au is a feature of the Umbrian language (e.g.
ote, Lat. aut) and other dialects, and was preserved in 'rustic' Latin
and even in the Latin of the streets of Rome
Cicero's rival Clodius
was the first of the gens to change the name Claudius to the plebeian
form Clodius, no doubt with the view of conciliating the mob. Cicero
himself in his letters often uses the more homely forms with o, e.g.
loreolam, pollulum, oricula, while plodo is quoted from his 'De Gloria'
by Diomede." Cf. Priscian i 52, au transit in o productam more antiquo,
ut “lotus” pro lautus, “plostrum” pro plaustrum, “cotes” pro cautes;
sicut etiam pro o, au, ut “austrum” pro ostrum, “ausculum” pro osculum,
frequentissime hoc faciebant antiqui. “Plostrum” and “plostellum,” as
the vulgar forms, are read in Hor. Sat. i 6, 42: ii 3, 247, but in the Odes
and Epistles of Hor. “plaustrum” is the form favoured by the MSS. (cf.
Wilkins on Εp. ii 2, 74).
"Flaurum": Vespasian scored by substituting for "Florus" (from
flos) the form "Flaurus" which at once suggests φλαῦρος (vilis, inutilis,
nequam).
expugnatus: cf. Tib. 21, 2, expugnatum precibus uxoris: Iul. 1, 3,
Sullam, cum deprecantibus .. aliquamdiu denegasset, atque illi pertinaciter
contenderent, expugnatum tandem proclamasse, etc.: Liv. xxxvii 56, 9,
senatum omni modo expugnaturum pertinaciam legatorum.
quasi: in a causal sense; see on Tit. 5, 1.
amore deperiret: cf. Dom. 3, 1, Paridis histrionis amore deperditam: Plaut. Cist. 132, is amore misere hanc deperit mulierculam:
Catull. 35, 12, quae illum deperit impotente amore. So too deperire
(without amore) = perdite amare “to love to distraction" "to be dying
with love for'"; e.g. Plaut. Bacch. 470, meretricem indigne deperit; cf.
Prop. ii 30, 29, (Iuppiter) ut Semela est combustus, ut est deperditus Io,
where Io is the accus.
suo: the MSS. vary, as usual, between suo and sui; in some the word
is omitted altogether, and Modderman (Lectiones Suetonianae р. 67)
suggests that this is due to the fact that the reading in the archetype was
amore se deperiret, a construction which the copyist failed to understand.
perductae: this verb is frequently used de feminis ad stuprum ductis
(e.g. Tib. 45, Calig. 25, 2, Cic. Verr. v 31, Hor. S. ii 5, 77, Ov. Am. iii 12,
11); so perductor for a pander or pimp (Plaut., Cic., etc.). Casaubon
proposed perducta and Burman perducta ei, making Vespasian the payee
and not the payer, on the ground that the penurious emperor would never
have paid 400,000 sesterces for the favours of a lady who was only too
anxious to grant them; but, as Ernesti pointed out, perducta requires
the further change of expugnatus to expugnato, and Vespasian's conduct
would have been so unutterably sordid that Suetonius would have mentioned it in c. 16 and not here. Vespasian was extravagant in matters of
love (cf. c. 21 where plurimae pallacae of his are mentioned), and it is
unnecessary to accuse him of behaving like the gallant captain Pyrgopolinices whose minimum fee was a talentum Philippum (Plaut. Mil. 1061).
sestertia quadringenta: about £3,400. Vesp. bestowed the same
amount on an actor, c. 19, 1. The variant quadraginta (GTQ) is read
by Burman and Ernesti.
admonente quem ad modum, etc.: the steward raised the question
"quem ad modum summam rationibus vis inferri?” Cf. Tit. 8, 1. For
the use of the pres. ptc. in the sense of a perf. or of a Greek aorist ptc.
cf. Iul. 65, ac subinde observandum se admonens repente interdiu vel
nocte se subtrahebat: ib. 73, Catullum.. satisfacientem eadem die adhibuit
cenae: Galb. 5, 2, revocante: ib. 10, cohortantibus: ib. 11, supervenientibus. See Kühner-Stegmann, i 757.
dispensatore: the dispensator ("payer out, lit. "weigher out'") was
the steward who had charge of the accounts (hence he was called at times
a rationibus) and made the payments; cf. Galb. 12, 3: Ner. 44, 1: Aug.
67, 1. He was nearly invariably a slave or freedman, and the value of
the position (dispensatio, c. 23, 2) is shown by the story in Oth. 5, 2 that
Otho extorted a million sesterces from a slave whom he had recommended
as dispensator to Galba.
Vespasiano adamato: dat. case; cf. the phrase ferre alicui expensum
"to debit" (referre alicui acceptum “to credit"). Baumg.-Cr. explains
it as the abl. (= Οὐεσπασιανοῦ ἐρασθέντος). Marcilius suggested that in
adamato there is a play on adhamato (“hooked"). The compound
adamare, which is first found in Cicero, is nearly always used in the
perfect forms (for rare exceptions see Thes. Ling. Lat.). It is a stronger
word than amare; cf. Sen. Ep. 71, 5, si
virtutem adamaveris, amare
enim parum est. The meaning of illicit love which it has in our passage
is found also in Ov. A.A. ii 109, Sit licet antiquo Nireus adamatus
Homero: Plin. N.H. viii 157, xxxvi 22: Petron. Satyr. 110, etc.
CHAPTER 23.
ut et de: the MSS. vary between et de (Ihm), et ut de, and ut de.
The correction ut et de, suggested by Preud'homme and defended by
Alexander, seems absolutely required by the use of the imperfect utebatur;
Suetonius gives two instances of what was a general habit of Vespasian.
a
a
improbiusque nato: if the text is not corrupt, natus here is to be
interpreted in the light of the meaning that natura sometimes has, viz.
the natural parts (e.g. Cic. N.D. iii 22, 55: Div. ii 70, 145), improbe
being used in the sense of enormiter; cf. Charis. i 102, 1, Chilones improbius labrati ('blubber-lipped''): Marc. Emp. 31, ad eos, quibus intestinum
improbe prominet. Casaubon, however, maintained that improbe natus
means ὁ κακῶς πεφυκώς, "homo deformi et turpi proceritate corporis," and
that ἔγχοs "hic dicitur de corpore producto ad instar perticae longuriive
(i.e. like a long staff or pole)"; so too Salmasius. Marcilius took improbe
natus as 'natura improbus, i.e. impudens," and explained the comparison
with
spear in
curious way: “Impudentiam huiusce Longini
Vespasianus argute cum hastae vibratione comparavit, quia impudenter
petens, et instans atque urgens, quasi hastam vibrare videtur atque intentare.'" Among the corrections suggested for nato are mutoniato and
vasato (both = magna mentula instructo); these give the sense required,
but neither explains the corruption. Suetonius may have written improbiusque venato (ve- being lost by haplography). vena is often used for
membrum virile (e.g. Mart. iv 66, 12: vi 49, 2), and though venatus does
not occur elsewhere, Suet. has several participial adjs. in -atus not found
earlier, e.g. cycladatus, discalciatus, fistulatus, infulatus, sagulatus, sericatus, tessellatus; cf. also pedatus (Oth. 12, 1) which means lit. "furnished
with feet."
μακρὰ . . . ἔγχος: Hom. Il. vii 213, νέρθε δὲ ποσσὶν | ἤϊε μακρὰ βιβάς, κ.τ.λ.,
describing Ajax about to give battle to Hector. The equivocal sense in
which Vespasian was using ἔyxos has its parallel in the play on the word
δόρυ by Diogenes the Cynic quoted by Diog. Laert. (vi 2, 53), and in
hasta = mentula.
Cerylo liberto: this freedman of Vespasian is not mentioned elsewhere, but Friedlaender plausibly suggests that it is with reference to
him that Martial chooses the name Cerylus in i 67, Liber homo es nimium,
dicis mihi, Ceryle, semper. | In te quis dicit, Ceryle, liber homo es?
ob subterfugiendum ius fisci: Vespasian occupied the position of a
patronus in relation to his freedman Cerylus. The rights of the patronus
in the estate of his freedman are described fully by Roby, Rom. Priv. Law i
270 sqq. When the freedman had no natural children born since his
manumission, the patron was entitled to one moiety of the estate. If he
left no own heirs (sui heredes) or natural children at all, the patron
succeeded to the whole estate. Under the Lex Papia (in the reign of
Augustus), if the freedman left fewer than three children, the patron
was to have one equal share (pars virilis), i.e. one-third if there were two
children, a moiety if he left only one, provided the estate exceeded 100,000
sesterces. The amount due to Vespasian on the death of Cerylus would
be collected by the officials of the fiscus (see on c. 16, 3).
The use of ob with the gerund or gerundive is found in early Latin
(Cato R.R., etc.); in Cic. frequently with pecuniam accipere or dare (ob
rem iudicandam, ob ius dicendum, ob innocentem condemnandum, etc.);
in Sall. (Iug. 89, 102), and Tac. (A. i 79, iv 31, xi 5). See KühnerStegmann, i 750.
ingenuum se
ferre: for se ferre in the sense of "to give oneself
out as" "pass oneself off as," cf. Vell. Pat. i 11, 1, qui se Philippum
regiaeque stirpis ferebat, cum esset ultimae: Tac. H. ii 72, extiterat
quidam Scribonianum se Camerinum ferens: iv 10, proditor corruptorque
amicitiae, cuius se magistrum ferebat.
Lachetem: it is not easy to see why Cerylus chose the name
"Laches," as it was one of the stock names for slaves in Greek comedy;
cf. Amm. Marc. xxviii 4, 27, Cum mutuum illi quid petunt, soccos et
Miconas videbis et Lachetas (i.e. they employ the wheedling style of slaves
in comedy): Dio Chrys. Orat. 74, οὐ κατὰ Λάχητα, οὐδὲ κατὰ Σίμωνα.
ὦ Λάχης ... Κηρύλος: the opening words, ὦ Λάχης, Λάχης, are from an
unknown play of Menander (frag. 921, Kock); the second line, ἐπὰν . . ἔσει,
is from the Θεοφορουμένη of Menander (frag. 223, 2, Kock), and Vespasian
added the words σὺ Κηρύλος, his meaning being that in dealing with the
estate of Cerylus the fiscus would treat him as a freedman in spite of his
claim to be freeborn and his change of name.
dicacitatem adfectabat: adfectare, like ζηλοῦν, was a tech. rhetorical
term for aiming at a certain effect in speech or writing. It is very
frequent in Quintilian, e.g. xi 1, 30, adfectata scurrilitas. Cf. the use of
captare in Hor. Sat. i 4, 82, qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis.
ut invidiam cavillatione dilueret: diluere as a rhet. term means "to
weaken the force of an opponent's argument or a charge brought," and
it was widely used in the general sense of extenuare or minuere in such
phrases as diluere infamiam, dedecus, nefas, peccata, etc. For cavillatione
see on Tit. 8, 2.
transferretque ad sales: the object of transferret is invidiam (not
lucra) and the verb here means 'to make use of for a new purpose"; cf.
Quintil. vi 2, 30, hoc animi vitium ad utilitatem non transferemus?
In
Tac. A. ii 65 "transferre invidiam" is used quite differently of transferring odium from oneself to another.
§2. dispensationem: see on dispensatore, c. 22.
exacta pecunia: cf. Oth. 5, 2, servo Caesaris pro impetrata dispensatione decies sestertium expresserat.
ordinavit: "appointed,” lit. "assigned him the rank or position
(ordo)"; cf. Iul. 76, 3, magistratus in plures annos ordinavit (for which
in Vitell. 11, 2, comitia in decem annos ordinavit, seque perpetuum consulem); so of appointing to commands, Aug. 46, equestrem militiam
petentes etiam ex commendatione publica cuiusque oppidi ordinabat. This
use of the verb does not seem to occur earlier, and Suetonius is also the
first to use ordinatio for "appointment to office." He frequently uses
ordinare in its more usual sense of arranging or putting in order; e.g.
Iul. 56, 7, ordinare bibliothecas (= digerere bibliothecas, Iul. 44):
Galb. 7, 1, electus ad ordinandam provinciam inquietam: Aug. 31,
annum (i.e. the calendar) a Divo Iulio ordinatum, sed postea neglegentia
conturbatum atque confusum, rursus ad pristinam rationem redegit.
ad calciandas mulas: in ancient times shoes were not put on mules
or horses except when a bad stretch of road had to be traversed or
when their hoofs were weak, and the shoes were never fastened by nails
but by strings or straps (lemnisci, fasciolae, Veget. i 26), no farrier being
needed to fix them. The shoe (solea, ὑπόδημα) was generally of iron, e.g.
Catull. xvii 26, ferream ut soleam (derelinquit) tenaci in voragine mula;
Nero's mules had shoes of silver (Ner. 30) and Poppaea's had shoes of
gold (Plin. N.H. xxxiii 140). calciare (calceare) is the word used by
Palladius, Pliny, Vegetius, etc., for putting on the shoes. See Reinach's
article "Mulomedicus" in Daremberg-Saglio.
non
§3. urinae vectigal: Dio lxvi 14, πρὸς τὸν Τίτον ἀγανακτοῦντα τῷ τοῦ
οὔρου τέλει, ὁ καὶ αὐτὸ μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων κατεδείχθη, εἶπε, λαβὼν ἐξ αὐτοῦ χρυσοῦς
πεπορισμένους καὶ δείξας αὐτῷ, “ Ἰδού, τέκνον, εἴ τι ὄζουσιν." At Rome, at least
as early as the 2nd cent. B.c., public urinals were placed in alleys (angiportus); Macrobius, Sat. iii 16, 15, quotes from C. Titius, a contemporary
of Lucilius, "dum eunt, nulla est in angiporto amphora quam
impleant.” The receptacles were amphorae or dolia (cf. Lucr. iv 1026,
Mart. xii 48, 8). Fullers (fullones) and tanners (coriarii), who used large
quantities of urine in their trades, were probably taxed by Vespasian for
the right of placing these receptacles and emptying them. This is the
explanation given by Beroaldus, and is much more probable than the
alternative assumption that the public were charged for the use of the
amphorae in the same way as, according to one interpretation of Juv. iii
38, they were charged for the use of the foricae or public jakes. It is
by no means certain that foricae in Juv. bears this meaning; the Schol.
also explains it as shops near the Forum, and this is accepted as correct by
Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 280.
admovit ad nares: Casaubon suggests that this was done because
the sense of smell was used by moneychangers and others as a means of
testing the genuineness of metals; cf. Aristot. de mirabil. 1088, Arrian
Epict. Dissert. i 20.
odore: Juvenal is referring to this story in his famous words lucri
bonus est odor ex re | qualibet (xiv 204).
non mediocris summae: Dio (lxvi 14) states the sum as 250,000 denarii
(= 1,000,000 sesterces), about £8,500.
statuam colosseam: like the Colossus of Nero, see on c. 18; the same
expression occurs in Plin. N.H. xxxiv 39 and 78 (cf. xxxv 51, Nero
iusserat colosseum se pingi).
iussit
ponerent: the MSS. vary between poneret (MGS) and
ponerent. Suetonius has iubere ut in Tib. 22 (lectis codicillis quibus ut
id faceret iubebatur), and the subjunctive with ut omitted in Vitell. 14, 4
(edictum quo iubebat urbe mathematici excederent); 'generally he
uses iubere with the acc. and inf. Ernesti and Burman read ponere,
arguing that the constr. legatos iussit ponerent is not found till a
much later period. Bentley made the same correction, and it is adopted
by Ihm. Bentley however is inconsistent, as in Ter. Andr. 412 he would
read: Erus me relictis rebus iussit Pamphilum | hodie observarem.
Alexander (op. cit. p. 18) also points out that the passive constr. in Suet.
Tib. 22 (quoted above) implies an active ‘‘lectis codicillis qui eum iusserunt
ut id faceret,” i.e. with an accusative preceding and a subjunctive
following. Roth conjectured ponere et (adopted in Preud'homme's text),
the best correction, if any were needed.
cavam manum: like the hand of a beggar; cf. Aug. 91, 2, stipem
quotannis die certo emendicabat a populo, cavam manum asses porrigentibus
praebens: Aristoph. Eq. 1083, ἔμβαλε κυλλῇ (sc. χειρί).
paratam basim: the pile of money was to be the statue resting on
his hand as base. For basis cf. Dom. 15, 2, a basi statuae triumphalis:
Aug. 31, 1, sub Palatini Apollinis basi. On the basis were inscribed the
name and honours; cf. Plin. Ep. iii 6, 5, iube basim fieri, ex quo voles
marmore, quae nomen meum honoresque capiat. The Greek origin of the
word basis (βάσις) is preserved in the case-forms like baseos (gen.) and
basin (acc.) which are found occasionally (see Thes. Ling. Lat.).
§ 4. ne in metu quidem
mortis abstinuit iocis: [Aur. Vict.]
Epit. 9, seriis ioca, quibus delectabatur, admiscens interiit. Cf. the spirit
of playfulness (τὸ παιγνιώδες) shown by Theramenes when drinking the hemlock (Xen. Hell. ii 3, 56).
prodigia: the same portents of his death are mentioned in Dio lxvi 17,
ἐγεγόνει δὲ σημεῖα αὐτῷ φέροντα εἰς τοῦτο, ὅ τε ἀστὴρ κομήτης ἐπὶ πολὺ φαντασθείς,
καὶ τὸ μνημεῖον τὸ τοῦ Αὐγούστου αὐτόματον ἀνοιχθέν.
Mausoleum: in 28 B.C. Augustus built in the northern part of the
Campus Martius a tomb for members of the house of the Caesars. It
was called the Mausoleum Augusti after the tomb built for the Carian
prince Mausolus (ob. 353 в.с.) by his wife Artemisia (cf. Aug. 100, Strab. v
236, Dio lviii 22). In shape it was circular with a base of white marble
about 300 ft. in circumference and 60 ft. in height, on which rose a mound
of earth covered with evergreens, the interior being divided into sepulchral
chambers to contain the ashes. A bronze statue of Augustus crowned
the whole. Tacitus calls it the tumulus Augusti or tumulus Iuliorum
(Ann. iii 4, xvi 6). The first whose ashes were laid there was the young
Marcellus (23 B.C.); then Agrippa (12 B.c.); Drusus, brother of Tiberius
(9 B.C.); Lucius and Gaius, adopted sons of Augustus (2 and 4 A.D.);
Augustus (14 A.D.); Germanicus (20 A.D., died in 19); Livia (29 A.D.);
Tiberius (37 A.D.). Caligula transferred to it the ashes of his mother and
his brother (Calig. 15), but was not himself buried there. Claudius,
Britannicus, and Vespasian were probably entombed in it, as were Nero's
wife Poppaea and the emperor Nerva. The other members of the Julio-Claudian and the Flavian houses were, with few exceptions, laid elsewhere
(see Jordan-Huelsen Topogr. Rom i 3, 614 sqq.). Dio (lxix 23) says that
by Hadrian's time the Mausoleum of Augustus was filled, and Hadrian
built another on the other side of the Tiber, the Mausoleum Hadriani
(mod. Castello di S. Angelo).
patuisset: so before Nero's death: de Mausoleo, sponte foribus patefactis, exaudita vox est nomine eum cientis (Ner. 46, 2).
stella crinita: the appearance of a comet betokened a ruler's death;
cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 41, taetrum sidus regnis quod crinitum vocatur: Suet.
Ner. 36, 1, stella crinita, quae summis potestatibus exitium portendere
vulgo putatur, per continuas noctes oriri coeperat: Claud. 46, praesagia
mortis eius praecipua fuerunt exortus crinitae stellae, etc.: Verg. G. i 489
(describing portents at the death of Julius Caesar), non alias
totiens arsere cometae: Shakespeare Jul. Caes. ii 2, When beggars die
there are no comets seen; The heavens themselves blaze forth the death
of princes. Seneca (N.Q. vi 3, 3) first uses crinitum sidus as a translation of κομήτης (ἀστήρ); the luminous tail of the comet was compared to
floating hair (κόμη, crinis).
diri
Iuniam Calvinam: daughter of M. Iunius Silanus (cons. 19 A.D.) and
of Aemilia Lepida. Her name Calvina was derived from her paternal
grandmother Domitia Calvina (Mommsen, Ephem. Epigr. i 64).
She is
mentioned in Tac. A. xii 4 as the "decora et procax soror" of L. Iunius
Silanus and daughter-in-law of L. Vitellius (censor 48 A.D.), being wedded
to L. Vitellius brother of the emperor Aulus (see Vitell. 3, 1). A charge
was trumped up against her of having incestuous relations with her
brother Silanus, and he was driven to suicide in 49 A.D., while she was
banished from Italy (Tac. A. xii 8). Ten years later she was restored
from exile by Nero (A. xiv 12).
e gente Augusti: she was a great-great-granddaughter of Augustus,
and, as such, might be buried in the Mausoleum Augusti. Her mother
Aemilia Lepida was a daughter of Aemilius Paulus and of Julia, who was
a granddaughter of Augustus.
pertinere: this verb is very frequently used of the application of
portents; e.g. Phaedr. iii 3, 6, ad consulendos currit maerens hariolos; | hic
pertinere ad domini respondet caput: Val. Max. i 6, haruspices ad salutem
imperatoris pertinere dixerunt.
Parthorum regem qui capillatus esset: in contrast to Vespasian who
was bald; cf. Dio lxvi 17, καὶ πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τοῦ κομήτου τι διαλαλοῦντας,
“ Οὐκ ἔμοιγε,” εἶπεν, “ἀλλὰ τῷ τῶν Πάρθων βασιλεῖ προσημαίνει· ἐκεῖνος μὲν γὰρ
κομᾷ (comatus est), ἐγὼ δὲ φαλακρός (calvus) εἰμι.” The Parthians, the successors of the Persians, wore the same flowing locks (τὸ ἄφετον καὶ ἀνειμένον
τῆς κόμης, Suid. s.v. Λεόννατος: Hdt. vi 19, τῶν Περσέων ἐόντων κομητέων).
In [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, 18 it is the Persian king whom Vespasian is said
to have mentioned: cum crinitum sidus apparuisset, “Istud,” inquit, "ad
regem Persarum pertinet, cui capillus effusior." The king of Parthia at
Vespasian's death was Vologaesus, successor to the Vologaesus mentioned
in c. 6 who must have died before June 78 as from that time a new image
appears on the coinage (Prosop. Imp. Rom. i 476; Gardner, Parthian
Coinage p. 76).
prima morbi accessione: Dio (l.c.) says that it was when Vespasian
believed that he was going to die (ἐπειδὴ ἐπίστευσεν ὅτι τελευτήσει) that he
said “ Θεὸς ἤδη γίγνομαι.”" Accessio (more rarely accessus) is regularly
used by post-Aug. writers for a "coming on" or "attack" of any
malady, especially an intermittent fever; the abatement of the attack is
decessio (decessus) or remissio. Cicero uses accedere in the same way:
Att. vii 2, alteram quartanam (sc. febrim)
dixit decessisse et alteram
leviorem accedere. Greek medical writers have εἰσβολή, προσβολή, ἐπίληψις,
ἐπισημασία, and παροξυσμός in the sense of accessio.
vae: some of the later MSS. have ut (so edd. princ., vulg.) or ne.
Many corrections have been proposed: vah (Graevius), nae (Gronovius), at
(Burman), eu (Modderman); but vae is rightly defended by Ernesti, who
says: Non modo iocus est in eo quod pro ‘morior” dixit “Deus fio," sed
etiam acumen in eo quod dolentis voce utitur in re, quae, si proprie diceretur,
felicitas esset.
deus fio: referring to the deification of the Roman emperors after
death, expressed by such phrases as inter divos referre (Aug. 97,2):
in numerum deorum referre (Claud. 45): caelum decernere (Tac. A. i 73):
caelestes honores decernere (A. xii 69). The honour was decreed by the
senate on the motion of the reigning emperor. Vespasian's deification is
mentioned by Pliny (Pan. 11), when congratulating Trajan on his reasons
for deifying Nerva: Quem tu .. templis honestasti, non imitatus illos qui
hoc idem, sed alia mente, fecerunt. Dicavit caelo Tiberius Augustum, sed
ut maiestatis crimen induceret, Claudium Nero, sed ut inrideret, Vespasianum
Titus, Domitianus Titum, sed ille, ut dei filius, hic, ut frater videretur. Tu
sideribus patrem intulisti, non ad metum civium, non in contumeliam.
numinum, non in honorem tuum, sed quia deum credis. Vespasian's
worship was in the care of the collegium Flavialium (Dom. 4, 4).
Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius were not deified,
and the senate was not cowed into granting the honour to Domitian
(see Dom. 23). Imperial deification, or apotheosis, is delightfully satirised
in Seneca's Apocolocyntosis (“Pumpkinification") of Claudius. Nero,
with grim humour, used to call mushrooms (boleti) the food of the gods
(deorum cibus) after they had been used to poison Claudius (Dom. 14, 1, n.).
CHAPTER 24.
consulatu suo nono: in 79 A.D.; see on c. 8, 1.
Campania: where Pompey also was stricken with fever; cf. Juv. x
283, provida Pompeio dederat Campania febres.
motiunculis: slight attacks, touches of fever or ague accompanied
by shivering; cf. Sen. Ep. 53, 6, levis aliquem motiuncula decipit, sed
cum crevit et vera febris exarsit, etc. Celsus (iii 5) uses motio for an
ague-fit. Cicero has commotiuncula in Att. xii 11, commotiunculis
συμπάσχω; cf. xiv 5, leviter commotus ("slightly indisposed'').
Cutilias: a Sabine village about 7 miles from Vespasian's native
place Reate. There was a small lake there (mod. Lago di Contigliano)
which Varro called the umbilicus Italiae as being in the centre of the
peninsula (Plin. N.H. iii 17). Close to it were springs, sulphureous and
others, and the Romans went there for "cures" either by drinking the
waters or by bathing in them. There is an epigram (Anth. Pal. ix 349)
addressed by Leonidas to Vespasian at Aquae Cutiliae on his birthday:
Ὑδατά σοι Κοτίλεια γενέθλιον ἦμαρ ὁρῶντι, | Καῖσαρ, ἐπιβλύζοι σωρὸν ἀκεσφορίης, |
ὄφρα σε κόσμος ἅπας πάππον τρισὶν αὐγάζηται, | ὡς πατέρα τρισσῆς εἴσιδεν εὐτοκίης.
Titus, like his father, died at Cutiliae; see Tit. 11.
Reatina rura: see c. 1, 2.
This
aestivare: cf. Galb. 4, 3, Tusculum, ubi aestivare consuerat.
verb is almost entirely post-Aug.; the only earlier writer who uses it is
Varro, e.g. R.R. ii 2, 9, mihi greges in Apulia hibernabant, qui in Reatinis
aestivabant. For petit = petiit cf. Oth. 7, 1.
frigidae aquae: the extreme coldness of the springs at Cutiliae and
their curative powers are mentioned in Plin. N.H. xxxi 10, Iuxta Romam
Albulae aquae volneribus medentur egelidae; sed Cutiliae in Sabinis gelidissimae suctu quodam corpora invadunt ut prope morsus videri possit, aptissimae stomacho, nervis, universo corpori: Vitruv. viii 3, Est autem aquae
frigidae genus nitrosum, uti Pinnae Vestinae, Cutiliis aliisque locis
similibus, quae potionibus depurgat per alvumque transeundo etiam
strumarum minuit tumores: Celsus iv 5 (on stomachic disorders), consistere
in frigidis medicatisque fontibus, quales Cutiliarum
sunt, salutare est.
super urgentem valitudinem etiam: cf. Liv. xxviii 46, Punicum
exercitum super morbum etiam fames affecit. The use of super in the
sense of praeter begins in prose with Livy and is common in later writers.
Suetonius has it repeatedly, and often follows it with etiam, quoque, or ct.
alvo
soluta: a regular phrase in medical writers; so too venter
solutus. In describing the last illness of Augustus, Suetonius (Aug. 97,
3) says: causam valitudinis contraxit ex profluvio alvi. Dio (lxvi 17),
while stating as an ascertained fact that Vesp. died of fever at the
Sabine springs, adds that there were some, including the future emperor
Hadrian, who falsely asserted that he was poisoned at a banquet by Titus.
Tacitus (A. xii 67, xiii 15) mentions "soluta alvus” as an effect of the
poison administered to the emperor Claudius and to Britannicus.
imperatorem stantem mori oportere: (Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, deinde
ventris eluvie fessus, et assurgens, ‘“Stantem,” ait, “imperatorem excedere
terris decet'': Dio lxvi 17, τῶν δὲ ἰατρῶν ἐπιτιμώντων ὅτι τῇ τε ἄλλῃ διαίτῃ
ὁμοίᾳ νοσῶν ἐχρῆτο, καὶ πάντα τὰ προσήκοντα τῇ ἀρχῇ ἔπραττε, “ Τὸν αὐτοκράτορα”
ἔφη “ ἑστῶτα δεῖ ἀποθνήσκειν.” Dio (lxix 18) attributes a like utterance to
Turbo, prefect of the praetorian guard in Hadrian's reign, who, when
advised by the emperor to take a rest when ill, replied: “Tὸν ἔπαρχον
(praefectum) ἑστῶτα ἀποθνήσκειν δεῖ.” Cf. Sen. Ep. 82, 21, quis post hanc
(contionem) dubitet se infestis ingerere mucronibus et stans mori (where
stans is opp. to fugiens): id. Ep. 37, 2, recto tibi invictoque moriendum
est. Seneca is always inculcating the Stoic doctrine that the "wise” man
should die in harness (in actu mori).
consurgit ac nititur: niti could be used by itself = "to make an effort
Holland
to rise"; cf. Sall. Iug. 101, niti modo ac statim concidere.
strangely takes nititur in the same sense as nitens in c. 20, and translates:
"As he was rising therefore and straining still to ease his body."
viiii Kal. Iul.: June 23.
annum agens sexagensimum ac nonum: a very careless expression,
though the meaning is clear; he was aged (natus) 69 yrs. 7 mths. and 7 days,
but in (agens) his 70th year. The variant gerens is preferred by Graevius,
Gronovius, Marcilius, Oudendorp, and Bremi. See on Dom. 1, 1, adulescentiae tempus
gessisse fertur.
mensem ac diem septimum: septimum is to be taken with mensem as
well as with diem; see App. i § 16. (d). Dio (lxvi 17) says that Vespasian
lived 69 yrs. 8 mths. (Zonaras adds "and 8 days"), and reigned 10 yrs.
all but 6 days. He was born on Nov. 17, 9 A.D. (see c. 2, 1), and died
on June 23, 79 A.D.; so that the calculation of his age by Suetonius as
69 yrs. 7 mths. 7 days is accurate. He reigned from July 1, 69 A.D., when
he was first proclaimed imperator at Alexandria (c. 6, 3), to June 23,
79 A.D., i.e. 10 yrs. all but 8 days.
See also on c. 25.
CHAPTER 25.
genitura: ''horoscope"; see on Tit. 9, 2. Cf. Eutrop. vii 20, Genituram
filiorum ita cognitam habuit, ut, cum multae contra eum coniurationes
fierent, quas patefactas ingenti dissimulatione contempsit, in senatu dixerit,
aut filios sibi successuros aut neminem: Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, divinis
deditus, quorum vera plerisque negotiis compererat, successores fidebat
liberos Titum ac Domitianum fore.
coniurationes: Dio (lxvi 16) describes how Julius Sabinus, a Gaul
who had taken part in the unsuccessful effort of Classicus to establish an
Imperium Galliarum in 70 A.D., and who styled himself a Caesar as being
descended from a bastard son of Julius Caesar, was brought to Rome in
79 after being nine years in hiding and was put to death by Vespasian's
orders along with his wife Epponina. He mentions at the same time the
conspiracy of Caecina Alienus and Eprius Marcellus, on both of whom the
emperor had lavished favours. For Caecina Alienus and his fate see on
Tit. 6, 2. Eprius Marcellus exercised great power both as an orator (cf.
Tac. Dial. 5. 8. 13) and informer (delator) in the reign of Nero. It was
he who secured the condemnation of Paetus Thrasea. At the beginning
of Vespasian's reign he was impeached by Helvidius Priscus, son-in-law of
Thrasea, but escaped through his influence with Mucianus and Domitian.
He enjoyed the friendship of Vespasian and was proconsul of Asia (70-
73 A.D.). When he was condemned by the senate for conspiring with
Caecina against the emperor in the later years of his reign, he committed
suicide (Tac. A. xii 4, xiii 33, xvi 23, etc.; H. ii 53, iv 6-8).
aut filios sibi successuros aut neminem: Dio lxvi 12, “Ἐμὲ μὲν υἱὸς
διαδέξεται ἢ οὐδεὶς ἄλλος.” Dio says that the words followed a display of
defiant insolence by Helvidius Priscus in the senate; see on c. 15. The
remark of Vespasian is much more appropriate if, as Suet. says, it was
made "post assiduas in se coniurationes" and so, presumably, towards the
end of his reign. There is no evidence that Priscus (executed in 73)
organised any conspiracy, though his denunciations of the empire were
revolutionary. Rostovtzeff (Social and Economic Hist. Rom. Emp. c. iv
n. 4) thinks that Priscus had been advocating in the senate the selection
as emperor of the best man of the senatorial class, taking the Stoic and
Cynic point of view, and that Vesp. would not listen to the suggestion
and uttered these words which mean that the reestablishment of the
Republic would be better than the method suggested by Priscus.
per quietem: "in a dream," cf. Iul. 7, 2:81, 3: Tib. 74: Claud.
37, 1: Ner. 7, 1:46, 1: Oth. 7, 2: Vesp. 5, 7:7, 2; so in Val. Max.,
Tac., etc. Cic. has in quiete and secundum quietem ("after going to
sleep''); Val. Max. also uses inter quietem.
stateram: stătēra was used either in the general sense of a scales or
balance (libra, trutina) or in the special sense of a steelyard. The mention
of the two scales (lances) shows that the former is the meaning here, as
in many other passages, e.g. Petron. Satyr. 35, stateram in cuius altera
parte scriblita erat, in altera placenta; see Wilkins on Cic. de or. ii 159,
aurificis statera. Vitruvius (x 3, 4) describes statera as a steelyard with
a beam or yard (scapus) marked by points (puncta), the hanging weight
(aequipondium) moving along the scapus, and the object weighed being
placed in a scale (lancula).
Palatinae domus: Augustus at first dwelt in the modest town house
of Hortensius, the orator, on the Palatine (Aug. 72, 1). When this was
struck by lightning, he gave the site for the stately temple to Apollo (Aug.
29, 3), and close to it he built a palace for himself. Tiberius built a
second palace near that of Augustus (see on Vitell. 15, 3, Tiberiana domus),
and in official documents the designation of the imperial buildings on the
Palatine continued to be Domus Augustana et Tiberiana or Domus
Palatina; cf. Dom. 15, 2. In popular speech and gradually in literature
Palatium, the name of the Palatine hill, came to be used for the palace
of the Caesars (e.g. Galb. 18, 1: Vitell. 15, 2); see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr.
Rom i 3, 64, where the double use of Quirinale in Italian is cited as a
parallel.
examine aequo: the examen was the tongue or needle which worked
in an eye (agina) or opening in the upper part of the balance and showed
whether the two scales were in equipoise; cf. Verg. A. xii 725, Iuppiter
ipse duas aequato examine lances | sustinet: Pers. i 6, examenque improbum in illa | castiges trutina.
filii: Titus and Domitian.
quando: see on c. 16, 3.
totidem annis: approximately 27 years.
(41-54 A.D.); Nero 14 (54-68); Vespasian 10
Domitian 15 (81-96).
Claudius reigned 13 years
(69-79); Titus 2 (79-81);
parique temporis spatio: by adding these words Suetonius presumably means that the two periods, when calculated accurately in years,
months, and days would exactly correspond. He does not himself furnish
us with the precise length of each reign, and the figures which we derive
from other sources vary considerably. Claudius reigned 13 yrs. 2 m. 20 d.
(Dio, Zonar., Joseph.). Nero reigned 13 yrs. 8 m. (Dio; Zonaras adding
"all but two days''); 13 yrs. 8 d. (Joseph.). Vespasian (see on c. 24)
reigned 10 yrs. all but 6 days (Dio); 11 yrs. 11 m. 22 d. (Clem. Alex.,
who mentions that some say 11 yrs. precisely); 10 yrs. 8 d. (Cedrenus);
9 yrs. 7 m. 12 d. (Epiphanius). Titus reigned 2 yrs. 2 m. 20 d. (Suet.,
Dio, Zonar.; for other figures see on Tit. 11). Domitian reigned 15 yrs.
5 d. (Dio, Zonar., Eutrop.).
2 H
CHAPTER 1.
cognomine paterno: Titus bore the cognomen of his father Vespasian;
his brother took the cognomen “Domitianus" from their mother
Domitilla (Vesp. 3). Titus' full name was Titus Flavius Vespasianus, the
nomen gentilicium “Flavius" being found only in C.I.L. xiv 3902. In
early inscriptions under Vespasian he appears as Vespasianus Caesar
(C.I.L. iii p. 849, x 8110, vi 346, etc.; Newton 30, 299, 324, 325); in
authors he is called simply Titus (Tacitus once calls him Titus Vespasianus,
H. ii 1); so in C.I.L. x 5405, Newton 168, and frequently on coins
(Eckhel, vi 350-364; Cohen, i² 428-464).
vir
amor ac deliciae generis humani: cf. Eutrop. vii 21, Titus
omnium virtutum genere mirabilis, adeo ut amor et deliciae humani
generis diceretur: Suidas, Τίτος, βασιλεὺς ῾Ῥωμαίων, Οὐεσπασιανοῦ υἱός, ἀνὴρ πᾶν
ἀρετῆς συνειληφὼς γένος, ὡς πρὸς ἁπάντων ἔρως τε καὶ τρυφή (deliciae) τοῦ θνητοῦ
προσαγορευθῆναι γένους: Aur. Vict. Caes. 10, 6, Huius sane mors adeo provinciis luctui fuit, uti, generis humani delicias appellantes, orbatum orbem
deflerent. Pliny (N.H. praef. 1) addresses Titus, to whom his work is
dedicated, as iucundissime; Augustine (Civ. Dei v 21) calls him suavissimus. Pacatus (Panegyr. in Theod. 11), referring to Titus, repeats the
phrase amor generis humani. Ausonius (Caes. xi) characterizes him as
“Felix imperio, felix brevitate regendi, | expers civilis sanguinis, orbis
amor."
•
ad promerendam omnium voluntatem: cf. Calig. 3, 1, promerendi
amoris
studium: Cic. Mur. 70, homines tenues unum habent in nostrum
ordinem aut promerendi aut proferendi beneficii locum. Suetonius also
uses promereri c. acc. pers., Aug. 3, 2, in promerendis sociis; Cic. uses
de of persons, Off. ii 53, paratiores erunt ad bene de multis promerendum.
artis: the artfulness of Titus in courting popularity is illustrated
by Suetonius in c. 8, 2.
fortunae: Dio (lxvi 18) says that men contrasted Augustus, who
would not have been so loved had he not lived so long, with Titus, who
would not have been so loved had he lived longer. Dio adds that if Titus
had lived long, it might have been shown that he owed his fame more to
good fortune than to merit: ὁ Τίτος
ἐπιεικῶς ἄρξας, ἐν ἀκμῇ τῆς δόξης
ἀπέθανε, τάχα ἂν ἐλεγχθείς, εἴγε ἐπὶ μακρὸν ἐβεβιώκει, ὅτι εὐτυχίᾳ πλείονι ἢ ἀρετῇ
ἐχρήσατο.
superfuit: = abunde fuit, redundavit (not adfuit, as Sabellicus and
others explain it). Gellius (i 22) condemns the use of superesse for adesse
reo, defendere causam (a use which occurs in Suet. Aug. 56, 3), and says:
Qui integre locuti sunt, magnam partem ‘‘superesse” ita dixerunt ut eo
verbo significarent superfluere et supervacare atque esse supra necessarium
modum.
et: = et quidem; cf. Tib. 34, 2, consuerat quadriplam strenam et de
manu reddere; Ner. 12, 1, etc.
quod difficillimum est, in imperio: Pitiscus aptly quotes Capitol.
Anton. Philos. 15, nemo fit principum quem non gravis fama perstringat,
usque adeo ut etiam Marcus in sermonem venerit, etc. Titus differed from
other Roman emperors, to many of whom might be applied the words of
Tacitus on the kings of the Suevi, A. xii 30, subiectis, dum adipiscerentur
dominationes, multa caritate, et maiore odio, postquam adepti sunt.
quando: for the causal sense of quando see on Vesp. 16, 3. Trachmann
(op. cit. p. 37) comments on its use here: “Quando” hic non causam
affert enuntiati principalis, cur Tito tantum vel ingenii vel artis vel fortunae
superfuerit, sed tanquam additamentum explicativum continet, cur scriptor
adiunxerit “et quod difficillimum est, in imperio"; hic enim, nisi fallor,
sententiarum nexus est: tantum illi.. superfuit, et, quod difficillimum
est, in imperio, id quod eo magis commemorandum vel mirandum est, quando
privatus non caruit.
privatus: cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 3, ubi patriae curam suscepit,
incredibile est, quantum, quem imitabatur, anteierit, praecipue clementia,
liberalitate, honorificentia, ac pecuniae contemptu, quae eo amplius grata
fuere, quod ex nonnullis a privato adhuc patratis, asperior luxuriaeque et
avaritiae amans credebatur fore. What Suetonius says here of Titus is
said of Vespasian by Ausonius (Caes. x): olim qui dubiam privato in
tempore famam, | rarum aliis, princeps transtulit in melius.
odio: he incurred this odium through his high-handed conduct as
prefect of the praetorian guard; see с. 6.
vituperatione publica: on account of his alleged vices people predicted that he would be a second Nero; see c. 7.
III. Kal. Ian.: Dec. 30.
insigni anno Gaiana nece: the emperor Gaius Caligula was assassinated
on Jan. 24, 41 A.D.; see on Oth. 6. 1. Suetonius is wrong in his dates.
Titus was born in 39, not in 41, as Suet. himself admits when he says
that Titus died (81 A.D.) in his 42nd year; see on c. 11. Weynand (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2697) suggests a possible confusion with Britannicus (see c. 2)
who was born in 41. Dio (lxvi 18) says correctly that Titus was 39 years,
5 months, and 25 days old when he succeeded Vespasian on June 24, 79 A.D.
Septizonium: from this passage it is clear that there was an older
Septizonium before the "Septizonium Severi" built in 203 A.D. by the
emperor Septimius Severus at the S.E. of the Palatine to provide a stately
front to his palace where it faced the Via Appia; cf. Spart. Sept. Sev. 19,
24 (where there is a variant Septizodium): Amm. Marc. xv 7, 3 (355 A.D.),
cum plebs ad Septemzonium (al. -zodium) convenisset, celebrem locum,
ubi operis ambitiosi nymphaeum Marcus (Aurelius) condidit. This building
of Severus apparently consisted of three stories of balconies or terraces
supported by columns and was destroyed in the 16th cent. by Sixtus V
who used the stone for building the Vatican (Burn, Rome and the
Campagna, p. 180). A "septizonium" at Lambaesus in Numidia is mentioned in C.I.L. viii 2657 (c. 225 A.D.) and a "septizodium" at some town
in the Roman province of Africa, C.I.L. viii (suppl.) 14372. Various views
have been held on the original meaning of “septizonium." Some suggest
2H2
that it was a structure consisting of 7 colonnades rising in tiers, each
narrower than the one supporting it, and semicircular in form: others
think that it rose in steps, or that it had 7 circular walls of different
heights and colours like Ecbatana in Media as described in Hdt. i 98.
According to Dombart (Pauly-Wissowa, ii A. 1578 sqq.), "septizonium”
corresponded to ἡ ἑπτάζωνοs, which was used primarily in a spatial sense
of the 7 zones into which the heavens and also the earth were divided, and
then in a temporal sense of the order of rotation of the 7 planets which
marked the 7 days of the week; “Septizonium,” as the name of a building,
denoted an ornamental structure serving in the main as a great public
calendar, displaying on its front (1) figures of the 7 planets (Saturnus,
Sol, Luna, Mars, Mercurius, Juppiter, Venus), (2) the 12 signs of the
zodiac marking the months, (3) the numbers of the days in the month.
There were holes to receive a peg (moved daily) opposite the various
planets, signs of the zodiac, and numbers of the days, so that the day of
the week, the day of the month, and the month of the year were visible
at a glance; see the illustrations given by Dombart in the article cited.
He regards "septizodium" as a corruption of "septizonium," while
Jordan-Huelsen (Topogr. Rom i 3, 100) favour the view of Maass (Die
Tagesgötter 106 sqq.) that “Septizodium" meaning "The House of the
Seven Planets (ἑπτὰ ζῴδια)" is the correct form, and that "Septizonium"
was a vulgar distortion of this.
perparvo: see on “perinfamis,” Vitell. 2, 4.
nam: see on Vesp. 12.
CHAPTER 2.
educatus in aula: at the court of Claudius. The emperors granted
this honour to children of illustrious families and of foreign rulers; see
Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 85. His father Vespasian had risen to the
highest offices at Rome under Claudius through his military achievements
and the favour of Narcissus (Vesp. 4, 1). Otho's grandfather was reared
in the house of Livia Augusta (Oth. 1, 1); Marcus Aurelius grew up at
Hadrian's court (Capitol. Anton. Philos. 4); Agrippa, great-grandson of
Herod the Great, was among those educated at the court of Claudius
(Joseph. Ant. xix 360).
Britannico: born in 41 A.D., son of the emperor Claudius and Valeria
Messalina. He was called at first Tiberius Claudius Germanicus, but after
his father's victories in Britain (43 A.D.) the senate decreed to the son
the title "Britannicus," to be his distinctive name (Claud. 27, Dio lx 22).
At the instigation of his second wife Agrippina (Galb. 5, 1) Claudius
adopted Domitius, her son by a former husband, into the Claudian house
with the name of Nero, and gave him precedence over Britannicus. Every
humiliation was inflicted on Britannicus, and when he was charged by
Agrippina with disrespect towards the adopted Nero, Claudius put to death
or exiled all his best instructors (Tac. 4. xii 41, optimum quemque
educatorem filii exilio aut morte adficit), and he was placed under the
control of persons appointed by his stepmother. Nero succeeded Claudius,
and in the second year of his reign (55 A.D.) poisoned Britannicus (Suet.
Ner. 33, Tac. A. xiii 16).
disciplinis: see on Galb. 5, 1.
magistros: including Sosibius, who is mentioned in Tac. A. xi 1 as
“Britannici educator." Sosibius, who, as Furneaux says, was probably a
freedman like Anicetus the tutor of Nero, was used as a tool by Messalina
and rewarded with 1,000,000 sesterces, nominally “quod Britannicum praeceptis, Claudium consiliis iuvaret” (4. xi 4); as an instructor of
Britannicus he was put to death by Claudius at the instance of Agrippina
(Dio lx 32).
metoposcopum: the custom of forecasting a person's future from an
examination of his brow by a μετωποσκόπος is referred to by Pliny (N.H.
xxxv 88) when describing the marvellous fidelity of the portraits painted
by Apelles: Imagines adeo similitudinis indiscretae pinxit ut—incredibile
dictu Apio grammaticus scriptum reliquerit quendam ex facie hominum
divinantem, quos metoposcopos vocant, ex iis dixisse aut futurae mortis
annos aut praeteritae. Juvenal also mentions it, vi 583, frontemque manumque | praebebit vati crebrum poppysma roganti. Metoposcopy and
Chiromancy were reckoned by Artemidorus (Oneirocr. ii 69) among the
more vulgar forms of soothsaying (Friedlaender, Sitteng. i10 213).
physiognomon, or physiognomist, differed from the metoposcopus by telling
characters, not fortunes; cf. Cic. Fat. 5, Quid? Socratem nonne legimus,
quemadmodum notarit Zopyrus physiognomon, qui se profitebatur hominum
mores naturasque ex corpore, oculis, vultu, fronte pernoscere? Stupidum
esse Socratem dixit et bardum,
addidit etiam, mulierosum: Cic.
Tusc. iv 37.
Narcisso: see on Vesp. 4, 1.
The
utique: here utique means "certainly," as in Ner. 22, 1; in Tib. 47,
Calig. 53, 1, and Ner. 28, 2 it means "especially"; it is used with a neg.
in Ner. 15, 2, triumphalia ornamenta
tribuit, nec utique (“necessarily'")
de causa militari. In Cicero this adv. occurs almost exclusively in the
Letters; Livy and Seneca use it very frequently.
potione: Suetonius (Ner. 33) describes how the first weak poison compounded by the archpoisoner (venenariorum index) Locusta proved ineffective when administered to Britannicus. Nero compelled her to make
a stronger potion which was tried first on a kid, and the animal lingered
for five hours. A still stronger brew was tried on a pig, which died at
once, and Nero ordered this mixture to be taken to the triclinium and
given to Britannicus, who dropped dead at the first taste (ad primum
gustum concidit). That account hardly tallies with what Suetonius says
here about Britannicus draining the draught (potione hausta), and about
Titus, who tasted it, escaping death. Tacitus (A. xiii 16), describing the
second attempt to poison Britannicus, says that a harmless draught of
very hot wine and water was offered to him after it had been tasted in
his presence, and when he rejected it as too hot, some cold water containing the virulent poison was poured in, and this proved fatal instantaneously.
cubans: used inaccurately instead of sedens. Children sat at table
and did not recline. The grandsons of Augustus sat beside him on the
lowest couch; Aug. 64, 3, neque cenavit una, nisi ut in imo lecto assiderent.
Claudius always had his children present at dinner along with the sons
and daughters of distinguished men, and they sat at the ends (arms) of
the couches as they ate: Claud. 32, adhibebat omni cenae et liberos suos
cum pueris puellisque nobilibus, qui more veteri ad fulcra sedentes vescerentur. Nero kept up this custom, but the children (including Britannicus)
sat at a table of their own more frugally furnished: Tac. A. xiii 16, mos
habebatur principum liberos cum ceteris idem aetatis sedentes vesci in
aspectu propinquorum propria et parciore mensa. See Marquardt, Privatl.2
p. 300.
iactantur
gravique morbo adfiictatus diu: cf. Cic. Cat. i 13, homines aegri febri
deinde multo gravius adflictantur. Oudendorp's suggestion
that sit has fallen out has nothing to recommend it. Suetonius expresses
himself with his usual brevity, but the meaning seems clearly to be that
Titus was believed to have tasted the poison and in consequence to have
been prostrated by a long illness. The illness was not a matter of opinion
or belief, the cause of the illness was. Fuisse is to be supplied with
adflictatus; cf. Calig. 50, creditur potionatus a Caesonia: Vesp. 16, 2,
creditur solitus promovere.
Alexander (op. cit. p. 18) argues that -que
should be regarded as an interpolation. Similarly -que is rejected by Polak
in Claud. 1, 4, Fuisse autem creditur non minus gloriosi quam civilis animi;
nam ex hoste super victorias opima quoque spolia captasse summoque
saepius discrimine duces Germanorum tota acie insectatus. In his note
on that passage Smilda defends -que as having an explicative force.
mox: =
postea; see on Oth. 10, 1.
statuam in Palatio posuit: cf. Oth. 1, 3.
quae circensi pompa praefertur: so among the honours decreed to
Germanicus after death was "ut ludos circenses eburna effigies praeiret'
(Tac. A. ii 83). In the procession at the opening of these games images
of the gods were carried in litters (fercula) on the shoulders of men or
in sacred cars (tensae, Vesp. 5, 7; cf. Dion. Hal. vii 72). An ivory image
of Julius Caesar was borne in a tensa while he was still alive (Iul. 76,
Aug. 43), and the honour was frequently decreed to the emperors after
death. The pompa circensis was marshalled on the Capitoline hill, and
then passed down the Sacra Via to the Forum, turned to the right through
the Vicus Tuscus, the Velabrum, the Forum Boarium, and through the
main entrance of the Circus (the Porta Pompae), and then passed once
round the metae. For a detailed account of this brilliant spectacle see
Friedlaender, Sitteng. ii¹º 44 and Mayor on Juv. x 36-46.
hodieque: = hodie quoque; see on Galb. 1.
prosecutus est: in the pompa circensis.
Suet. uses prosequi very
frequently both in the sense of accompanying as a mark of respect
(προπέμπειν), and in the general sense of honouring; e.g. Oth. 1, 3, Senatus
honore rarissimo, statua in Palatio posita, prosecutus est eum: Dom. 9, 2,
omnes circa se largissime prosecutus.
CHAPTER 3.
corporis animique dotes: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 2, a puero praeclaris
studiis, probitatis, militiae, litterarum, instantissime deditus, quo contenderit, animi et corporis muneribus ostendit. dos, in the sense of a
bodily or mental gift or endowment, is a favourite word with Ovid, who
has dos corporis, formae, oris, ingenii, etc. So in prose writers of the
Silver age, e.g. Sen. Vit. Beat. 8, 2, corporis dotes. Suet. uses virtutes in
the same way, e.g. Calig. 3, 1, corporis animique virtutes.
explenduerunt: explendescere is found earlier in Nepos, Att. 1, in
pueritia nobilis inter aequales ferebatur, clariusque explendescebat. Cicero
uses the simple verb; e.g. Sen. 9, 28, canorum illud in voce splendescit
etiam in senectute. Cf. the metaph. uses of effulgere, emicare, enitere.
non minus auctoritatis quam gratiae: cf. Tac. H. ii 1, Titi ingenium
quantaecumque fortunae capax, decor oris cum quadam maiestate.
quanquam: see on c. 7, 2.
ventre paulo proiectiore: so Nero is described as “ventre proiecto”
(Ner. 51). Persius uses protensus, i 57, pinguis aqualiculus (“paunch'')
protenso sesquipede extet.
memoria singularis: this is the reading of nQ; the other MSS.
have memoriae, but the nom. is required. Oudendorp suggested memoria
et singularis docilitas. The whole passage very closely resembles the
description of Germanicus in Calig. 3, 1, Omnes Germanico corporis animique
virtutes, et quantas nemini cuiquam, contigisse satis constat: formam et
fortitudinem egregiam, ingenium in utroque eloquentiae doctrinaeque genere
praecellens, benivolentiam singularem conciliandaeque hominum gratiae ac
promerendi amoris mirum et efficax studium.
docilitas ad: Suet. extends to the subst. the constr. often found
with the adj., e.g. Calig. 54, 2, docilis ad cetera. In class. Lat. docilis is
used either abs. or c. ad; in poetry at times c. gen.; in post-Aug. writers
at times c. abl.
tum belli tum pacis: it was exceptional to excel in both; cf. Hom.
Il. xiii 730, ἄλλῳ μὲν γὰρ ἔδωκε θεὸς πολεμήϊα ἔργα, κ.τ.λ. : Prop. iii 9, 19,
hic satus ad pacem, hic castrensibus utilis armis: Plin. Pan. 4, Enituit
aliquis in bello, sed obsolevit in paсе. Alium toga, sed non et arma
honestarunt: Claud. Laud. Stil. i 27, bellis insignior ille, Sed pacem foedat
vitiis
Partitum; singula quemque Nobilitant. Titus was like Scipio
Aemilianus, whom Velleius (i 12) describes as “omnibus belli ac togae
dotibus ingenique ac studiorum eminentissimus saeculi sui.”
..
§ 2. armorum et equitandi peritissimus: Suetonius uses the same
words of Julius Caesar (Iul. 57).
Latine Graeceque: Eutrop. vii 21, facundissimus, bellicosissimus,
moderatissimus; causas Latine egit, poemata et tragoedias Graece composuit: Suidas, τῇ μὲν Λατίνων ἐπιχωρίῳ γλώττῃ πρὸς τὰς τῶν κοινῶν ἐχρῆτο
διοικήσεις, ποιήματα δὲ καὶ τραγῳδίας Ἑλλάδι φωνῇ διεπονεῖτο. Suidas also styles
Titus εὐγλωττότατος (facundissimus).
orando: Quintilian (prooem. 4) uses ars orandi for the oratorical art.
In Calig. 3, 2, Suetonius has orare causam (so Livy); cf. orare litem (Cic.).
fingendis poematibus: fingere (like πλάττειν) was used by the poets
in the sense of composing; e.g. Hor. C. iv 2, 31, operosa parvus Carmina
fingo. Pliny (N.H., praef. 5) eulogizes the eloquence and poetic skill of
Titus: Fulgurat in ullo umquam verius dicta vis eloquentiae, tribuniciae
potestatis facundia? Quanto tu ore patris laudes tonas! quanto fratris
amas! quantus in poetica es! O magna fecunditas animi!
ad usque: the position of usque varies; cf. Vesp. 24, usque ad
defectionem: Tib. 51, 1, ad simultatem usque processit: Galb. 19, 2, in
Forum usque: Tib. 2, 4, usque in Capitolium.
extemporalitatem: Suetonius seems to have coined this subst. to
express what he elsewhere calls "ad subita extemporalis facultas'' (Aug.
84, 1). The adj. extemporalis is common in post-Aug. writers (Quintil.,
Plin. Ep., Mart., Tac., etc.); Cicero uses subito dicere and subita et fortuita
oratio (de or. i 33, 150); also ex tempore, e.g. Arch. 8, 18, magnum
numerum optimorum versuum dicere ex tempore: de or. iii 50, 194, versus
fundere ex tempore.
musicae: Friedlaender (Sitteng. ii10 183 sqq.) traces the modifying
influence of Greek manners and customs on the old Roman prejudice not
merely against professional but also against amateur musicians. Nepos
(Epam. 1) states bluntly the old point of view that music was unseemly
for a man of prominent position: musicen nostris moribus abesse a principis persona. Under the Empire musical dilettantism was very widespread even in the highest circles. Nero, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius,
Commodus, Alexander Severus, Elagabalus, Caracalla were among the
emperors who cultivated the art.
cantaret et psalleret: psallere was specially used of playing on the
cithara (κυρίως ψάλλειν τὸ τῷ ἄκρῳ τῶν δακτύλων τῶν χορδῶν ἅπτεσθαι, Suidas),
e.g. Hor. C. iv 13, 7, docta psallere Chia. We frequently find psallere
joined with cantare or canere (e.g. Cic. Cat. ii 10, qui non solum
cantare et psallere, sed etiam sicas vibrare didicerunt), and psallere
itself was used of singing to the harp (cf. "psalm'').
scienter: an adverb often used of a skilful musical performance;
cf. Cic. Brut. 54, ex nervorum sono in fidibus quam scienter ei pulsi sint,
intellegi solet: Nepos (praef. 1), saltasse eum (Epaminondam) commode,
scienterque tibiis cantasse. Terence (Eun. 133) has the phrase scire
fidibus "to be skilled on the lyre"; so too scitus is used with the gen.
of the instrument played on, e.g. Ov. F. v 54, scita Thalia lyrae.
notis: notae (σημεῖα) = “shorthand'; notarius (σημειογράφος, ταχυγράφος)
= 'shorthand writer." The signs used in shorthand at Rome were known
as Notae Tironis, from Tiro the freedman and secretary of Cicero. For
such contractions in MSS. see Lindsay, Introd. to Lat. Text. Emend. p. 91.
Cato's speech against Caesar on the subject of the Catilinarian conspiracy was the first speech in the senate reported in shorthand.
system was developed and augmented by Maecenas and Seneca.
Tiro's
excipere velocissime: in the epigram (146) of Ausonius entitled "Ad
Notarium Velocissime Excipientem'' the speed of the notarius is described
in an exaggerated fashion: Tu sensa nostri pectoris | ut dicta iam ceris
tenes |... Tu me loquentem praevenis. | Quis, quaeso, quis me prodidit? |
Quis ista iam dixit tibi, | quae cogitabam dicere? Cf. Mart. xiv 208,
Currant verba licet, manus est velocior illis; | nondum lingua suum, dextra
peregit opus: Manil. iv 197, Ille scriptor erit felix, cui littera verbum
est, | quique notis linguam superet cursumque loquentis, | excipiens longas
nova per compendia voces: Sen. Ep. 90, 25, Quid (loquar) verborum notas,
quibus quamvis citata excipitur oratio et celeritatem linguae manus
sequitur?
amanuensibus: the subst. amanuensis is first found in Suetonius, who
uses it also in Ner. 44, 1. It denotes a secretary, a confidential slave or
freedman, servus a manu; cf. Aug. 67, 2, Thallo a manu, quod pro epistula
prodita denarios quingentos accepisset, crura ei fregit: Iul. 74, 1, Philemon
a manu: Vesp. 3, Caenis, Antoniae liberta et a manu. Another phrase is
ab epistulis; e.g. Claud. 28, Narcissus ab epistulis, Pallas a rationibus.
chirographa: chirographum (χειρόγραφον), first used by Cicero, has three
meanings in Suetonius: (1) handwriting (as here; Aug. 64, 3, ut imitarentur
chirographum suum; Ner. 52, versibus ipsius chirographo scriptis): (2) a
letter or document in a person's handwriting (as Tit. 6, 2, chirographum
eius praeparatae apud milites contionis, Aug. 87, 3,; Dom. 1, 1; Iul. 17, 1;
Calig. 24, 3): (3) a bond (cautio) under one's own hand, guaranteeing the
fulfilment of an obligation (Calig. 12, 2, deque ea re et iure iurando et
chirographo cavit).
falsarium: falsarius is found once earlier in Cato (or. inc. frag. 28,
Meyer) of one who is guilty of “suppressio veri”: Tu, inquam, si verum
supprimis, falsarius agnosceris; si falsa confingis, mendax esse videris..
In Suetonius and later writers it means a forger of written documents,
especially wills. Precautions devised against falsarii in the reign of Nero
are mentioned in Ner. 17: adversus falsarios tunc primum repertum, ne
tabulae, nisi pertusae, ac ter lino per foramina traiecto, obsignarentur, etc.
When a falsarius was convicted before Claudius, some one in court cried
out that his hands should be cut off, whereupon the emperor at once ordered
the executioner to be summoned with knife and butcher's block (Claud.
15, 2). Banishment and confiscation of goods were the penalties for
forgery under the Lex Cornelia de falsis (81 B.c.) also known as the Lex
testamentaria. Cicero uses testamentarius for a forger (Off. iii 73,
Sest. 39). For Domitian's allegation that Titus falsified Vespasian's will
see Dom. 2, 3.
CHAPTER 4.
..
tribunus militum
meruit: see on Vesp. 2, 3. Titus would be at
least 20 when he was appointed tribune (Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 366),
probably nearer 25 (Mommsen, Hermes iii 43). Military service, generally
for a year, was a necessary preliminary to a senatorial career (Galb. 6, 1,
n.); e.g. the younger Pliny served as military tribune in Syria (Plin.
Ep. iii 11). See also on “praefectura,” Vesp. 8, 3.
in Germania: cf. the speech of Mucianus to Vespasian, Tac. H. ii 77:
Tuae domui triumphale nomen, duo iuvenes, capax iam imperii alter (i.e.
Titus) et primis militiae annis apud Germanicos quoque exercitus clarus.
The statement made by Heraeus (on Tac. H. ii 1) and by Spooner (on
H. ii 77) that Titus served as military tribune under his father Vespasian
when he was in command of a legion in Germany (Vesp. 4, 1) is absurd.
Vespasian got his command in Germany in 41/42 A.D., and Titus was born
in 39 A.D. (41 A.D., according to Suet. Tit. 1). Weynand (Pauly-Wissowa,
vi 2697) erroneously says that Titus is given the title of “Germanicus"
in Tac. H. iii 66, for the Germanicus mentioned there is a son of Vitellius.
The elder Pliny, in the Preface to his N.H. (dedicated to Titus), refers to
his having served in the army with Titus: et nobis quidem qualis (tu) in
castrensi contubernio! Nothing definite is known as to when and where
Pliny (born 23/24 A.D.) and Titus served together; for the theory that it
was during the war in Judaea see Prosop. Imp. Rom. iii 51, Weynand l.c.
in Britannia: Dio (1x 30) makes the statement, which is chronologically impossible, that Titus accompanied Vespasian to Britain in 43 A.D.,
and saved his father's life when he was sore pressed by the Britons in 47.
See Furneaux, Tac. Ann. Vol. ii² p. 132 n. Vespasian's military achievements in Britain are mentioned in Vesp. 4, 1.
industriae: his father was characterised by the same energetic discharge of military duties; cf. Vesp. 4, 5 delectus est ut industriae expertae.
modestiae: “disinterestedness,” “integrity'"; cf. the use of modestus
(= ἐγκρατής) in Dom. 8, 2 of magistrates and provincial governors who
refrain from extortion, etc.
statuarum multitudine: these presumably were set up after the
establishment of the Flavian dynasty at Rome.
titulis: inscriptions on the base ('basis,” Vesp. 23, 3) of statues and
busts, giving the distinctions of the person represented; cf. Dom. 15, 2,
Galb. 2.
§2. Foro operam dedit: at Rome under the Empire the forum
Romanum, the forum (Iulii) Caesaris, and the forum Augusti were
used for the trial of lawsuits; hence triplex forum in Mart. iii 38, 4,
"Causas,” inquis, “agam Cicerone disertior ipso, | atque erit in triplici
par mihi nemo foro.”
honestam magis quam assiduam: Titus did not appear regularly in
court, but only in cases where glory was to be won. Pliny (Ep. vi 29),
after enumerating various kinds of cases which a pleader ought to undertake, says: "Ad haec ego genera causarum, ambitiose fortasse, addam
tamen claras et inlustres. Aequum est enim agere ("to plead") поп
numquam gloriae et famae, id est suam causam.”
Arrecinam: the correct form of this name was restored by Roth;
the MSS. have adrecidiam (arr-, ПR). Arrecina Tertulla was the daughter
of M. Arrecinus Clemens, who was praetorian prefect under Caligula in
41 A.D. (Tac. H. iv 68, Joseph. Ant. Iud. xix 37 sqq.). Her brother,
M. Arrecinus Clemens, also was praetorian prefect and twice consul; see
Dom. 11, 1. Arrecina Tertulla is twice mentioned in inscriptions: C.I.L. vi
12355 (Newton 234), Dis manibus M. Arrecini Melioris, Arrecina Tertulla
delicio suo fecit. v(ixit) a(nnis) viii d(iebus) x: C.I.L. vi 12357 (Newton
235), D. m. Arrecinae Gnomes, Arrecina Tertulla delicio suo fecit.
praefecto praetorianarum cohortium: the highest office open to the
equestrian order (summa equestris gradus, Galb. 14, 2; cf. Tit. 6, 1). In
Republican days the praetoria cohors was the bodyguard attached to the
general; cf. Paul. ex Fest. p. 223 Müll.: praetoria cohors est dicta quod
a praetore non discedebat. Scipio enim Africanus primus fortissimum
quemque delegit, qui ab eo in bello non discederent et cetero munere militiae
vacarent et sesquiplex stipendium acciperent. Under Augustus there were
9 cohorts in different parts of Rome and in the places in Italy where he
usually stayed. Each cohort consisted of 1000 men (10 centuries) and
10 turmae of cavalry. Sejanus, under Tiberius, concentrated the cohorts
Their
in a camp outside the Viminal gate of Rome (Galb. 19, 1, n.). They were
increased to 11 or 12 under Caligula or Claudius. Vitellius disbanded
them (Vitell. 10, 1), but later enrolled 16 new cohorts. The number was
reduced to 9 by Vespasian, and was subsequently fixed at 10.
supreme commander was the emperor, but he delegated his command,
usually to 2 praefecti praetorio (-ii), sometimes to 1, after the time of
Commodus to 3. Suetonius uses praefectus praetorii in Galb. 11:14, 2:
Claud. 12, 1: Ner. 21, 1: Calig. 56, 1; praefectus (sc. praetorii) in Calig.
23, 2: Claud. 21, 3: Ner. 35, 5. The designation praefectus cohortium
praetorianarum used here and in Dom. 6, 1 is irregular. Though writers
at times use cohortes praetorianae, the regular phrase in inscriptions,
especially military diplomata, is cohortes praetoriae. See Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 866 sqq.
Marciam Furnillam: daughter of the Antonia Furnilla, wife of
Q. Marcius Barea Sura, who is mentioned in an inscription at Rome
(Dessau, 953): Antonia A. f. Furnilla Q. Marcii Q. f. C. n., C. et Gemini
Artori pronepotis, Bareae Surae.
splendidi: see on Oth. 1, 3.
sublata: tollere was used of the father taking up and acknowledging
as his the new-born child which was laid at his feet, and so tollere liberos =
procreare, gignere; cf. Ner. 5, 2, sublato filio Nerone ex Agrippina:
Tib. 7, 2, sublato ex ea filio Druso: Cic. Phil. xiii 10, qui ex Fadia sustulerit
liberos.
filia: named Julia. She was born before 67, and Jerusalem was taken
by Titus on her birthday in 70 (see c. 5, 2). She received the title
"Augusta" in her father's reign, and is so styled on coins of Titus with
the legend Iulia Augusta T(iti) Aug(usti) f(ilia) or Iulia Imp. T. Aug. f.
Augusta (Eckhel, vi p. 367; Cohen, i² p. 465 sq.). After being offered in
marriage to Domitian, who refused her (Dom. 22), she wedded her cousin
Flavius Sabinus. When he was put to death by Domitian's orders (Dom.
10, 4), Domitian, who was separated at the time from his wife Domitia,
lived with Julia as with a wife, and even after he took back Domitia
(Dom. 3, 1) he continued his illicit relations with his niece, and was the
cause of her death through abortion (Dom. 22). She died before 90 A.D.,
as she is called diva on a coin of that year (see Friedlaender, Mart. Introd.
p. 57). Martial (vi 3 and 13) writes of her as already deified, that book
of his epigrams being published in 90. Her name appears in the vow of
the Fratres Arvales for the safety of the imperial family, January 3, 87
(C.I.L. vi 2065), but is omitted in the vow of January 3, 90 (C.I.L. vi
2067), so that presumably she died before the latter date (see Newton,
op. cit. p. 101).
§ 3. quaesturae: the minimum age for the quaestorship was 25; presumably Titus was quaestor in 64 or 65.
legioni praepositus: when Vespasian was appointed by Nero in the
winter 66/67 to conduct the war in Judaea (see Vesp. 4, 5), he sent Titus
to Alexandria to lead as legatus the 15th legion (Apollinaris) from there
to Judaea. Vespasian went from Achaea overland via the Hellespont, and
was joined by Titus at Ptolemais (Acre) on the coast of Phoenicia (Joseph.
Bell. Iud. iii 8, 64).
Taricheas: read by Ursinus, Roth, Preud'homme: Tarichias, Bentley;
Tarichaeas, Ihm; Taricheam, Herm. Barbarus; the MSS. have thracias
(thacias, G; trachias, Πк). The city of Taricheae (Ταριχέαι, Strab.;
Ταριχαῖαι, Joseph.; Tarichea, Plin. N.H.) was in Galilee on the western
side of the sea or lake of Tiberias (Gennesaret). Strabo (xvi 764) says
it got its name from the fish-curing industry (ἡ λίμνη ταριχείας ἰχθύων ἀστείας
παρέχει). It was fortified by Josephus who made it his headquarters in the
rebellion of the Jews against Rome. It was taken by Titus with great
slaughter (Joseph. Bell. Iud. iii 485 sqq.).
Gamalam: opposite Taricheae, on the eastern side of the lake. Built
on a precipitous hill resembling a camel's hump (hence the name), it too
was strongly fortified by Josephus and fiercely defended by the Zealots
against Vespasian. Titus, who had been sent on a mission to Mucianus,
the legatus of Syria, found on his return that Vesp. had been beaten back
from Gamala. At the head of a small body of picked troops Titus forced
his way into the city and Vesp. sent back his whole army to support him.
The city was captured during a violent storm and 9000 of the inhabitants
perished (Joseph. iv 1 sqq.). Titus also effected the capture of Gischala,
and with its downfall the conquest of Galilee was complete.
sunt
equo sub feminibus amisso: cf. Coel. or. frag. 3 (Paul. ex Fest.
p. 182 M.), equusque mihi sub feminibus occisus erat. Isidorus (Orig. 11, 1,
106) mentions the phrase in his attempt to differentiate between femora
and femina: "femora”
ab inguinibus usque ad genua,
“femina” autem per derivationem femorum partes sunt, quibus in equitando tergis equorum adhaeremus; unde et proeliatores olim sub feminibus
equos amisisse dicebantur. Formations from femin- are much more frequent
than those from femor- in the plur. of femur (femen); see statistics in
Thes. Ling. Lat. Suetonius uses femur, femore, femina, feminibus.
inscenso: Suet. also has the more usual conscendere equum, ascendere
equum (in equum, Cic.).
less.
rector: "rider," as in Tac. and Sil. Ital.; vector (Heinsius) is needcirca se: "by his side." For se instead of eum see on Vesp. 15, 1,
qui
se salutaverat. The use of circa is the same as in Claud. 36,
quodam cum ferro circa sacrificantem se deprehenso. Suetonius uses
circa very freely in the spatial sense of prope (in c. 9, 2 = utrubique "on
both sides of'"); he also has it of those who are about a person, his
suite, associates, etc. (cf. οἱ περί τινα); e.g. Dom. 9, 2, omnes circa se
largissime prosecutus. See also on Oth. 11, circa lucem: Dom. 3, 2, circa
administrationem imperii. The late variant contra se is adopted by most
of the early editors (not by Oudendorp, Wolf, or Bremi), with the view
of enhancing the valour of Titus.
CHAPTER 5.
missus: he was sent by Vespasian; cf. Tac. H. i 10, nec Vespasiano
adversus Galbam votum aut animus: quippe Titum filium ad venerationem
cultumque eius miserat: H. ii 1, Titus Vespasianus e Iudaea, incolumi
adhuc Galba, missus a patre. Josephus (Bell. Iud. iv 498) says that king
Agrippa went from Judaea along with Titus to pay homage to Galba;
he also says that Vespasian wished to receive directions from Galba with
regard to the war in Judaea. In Gall. 23 Suetonius mentions Vespasian's
belief that Galba had sent emissaries from Spain to Judaea to assassinate
him.
quaqua iret: quaqua (= quacumque or quocumque) is ante- and post-class.; e.g. Plaut. Mil. 92, quaqua incedit: Apul. Met. xi 4, quaqua perfluebat. Cf. Neue-Wagener, Formenlehre ii 635. For the use of the subjunctive see App. i § 8. b. (2).
convertit: see on Vesp. 4, 6.
..
..
quasi arcesseretur: quasi is widely used in Silver Lat. in a causal
sense. The cause or reason introduced by quasi is often purely subjective,
but there is no necessary implication of falsehood. Suetonius has it (a) with
the subjunctive as here and in Dom. 10, 4, occidit Helvidium, quasi
taxasset: Vesp. 6, 2, perseveraverunt, quasi rumori minus crederent:
Aug. 11, medicus custoditus, quasi venenum volneri indidisset; (b) with
nouns, adjs., ptcples.; e.g. Oth. 1, 2, praepositos suos, quasi defectionis
auctores, occiderant : Galb. 3, 4, ne quasi ignaram fallere videretur:
Aug. 86, 2, increpat Antonium, quasi scribentem ea. For examples in other
authors see Kühner-Stegmann, ii 456.
adoptionis gratia: Tac. H. ii 1, Titus causam profectionis officium
erga principem (i.e. Galba) et maturam petendis honoribus iuventam ferebat
("alleged"), sed vulgus fingendi avidum disperserat accitum in adoptionem.
Materia sermonibus senium et orbitas principis et intemperantia
('impatience'") civitatis, donec unus eligatur, multos destinandi.
Galba's choice of an adopted son and successor see Galb. 17.
..
For
sed ubi
sensit: the considerations which influenced Titus in
deciding whether he should return, or continue his journey to Rome, are
described by Tac. (l.c.): Ubi Corinthi certos nuntios accepit de interitu
Galbae et aderant qui arma Vitellii bellumque affirmarent, anxius animo
paucis amicorum adhibitis cuncta utrimque perlustrat. Si pergeret in
urbem nullam officii gratiam in alterius honorem suscepti ac se Vitellio
sive Othoni obsidem fore: sin rediret, offensam haud dubiam victoris, sed
incerta adhuc victoria et concedente in partes patre filium excusatum. Sin
Vespasianus rem publicam susciperet, obliviscendum offensarum de bello
agitantibus. His ac talibus inter spem metumque iactatum spes vicit.
This is the only passage in which Suetonius uses ubi in a temporal sense.
redit: perf. Tacitus (H. ii 2) describes his return journey from
Corinth. He coasted along Achaea (Attica and Euboea) and then sailed
across the Aegaean to Asia Minor, and descending that coast and leaving
it on the left, he arrived at Rhodes and Cyprus. From Cyprus he sailed
by a bolder course (audentioribus spatiis) across the open sea to Syria.
adito Paphiae Veneris oraculo: Tac. (l.c.), Atque illum cupido incessit
adeundi visendique templum Paphiae Veneris inclitum per indigenas
advenasque. The foundation of this famous temple and oracle at Paphos
in Cyprus, where Aphrodite was said to have landed when she rose from
the sea, is discussed by Tacitus (H. ii 3, cf. A. iii 62). The image of the
goddess was merely a cone-shaped stone, and the altar, though in the open
air, was never wet by rain. Pausanias (i 14) says that her worship was
introduced at Paphos from Assyria, but more probably it was Phoenician
colonists who spread the cult of Venus Urania (= Astarte); cf. Hdt. i 105.
A grove and altar of Aphrodite at Paphos are mentioned in Hom. Od. viii
362. One of the functions of the sea-born goddess was to grant to mariners
a favourable voyage; hence such titles of hers as Εὔπλοια (Roscher, Lex.
Myth. i 402).
dum de navigatione consulit: Tac. H. ii 5, Titus de navigatione
primum consuluit. Postquam pandi viam et mare prosperum accepit, de se
per ambages interrogat caesis compluribus hostiis. Sostratus (sacerdotis
id nomen erat) ubi laeta et congruentia exta magnisque consultis adnuere
deam videt, pauca in praesens et solita respondens petito secreto futura
aperit. Titus aucto animo ad patrem pervectus suspensis provinciarum
et exercituum mentibus ingens rerum fiducia accessit.
confirmatus est: like Vespasian, when he consulted the oracle of the
god of Carmel, Vesp. 5, 6; cf. also Galb. 9, 2.
§2. cuius brevi compos: cuius refers to spe; cf. Liv. xxix 22, spei
conceptae compos: Suet. Aug. 28, 2, fecit ipse se compotem voti: Aug. 58,
2, compos factus votorum meorum:
Romanum voti compotem fecit.
Calig. 13, imperium adeptus populum
The hopes of Titus were as good as
realised when his father Vespasian was chosen as emperor.
ad perdomandam Iudaeam relictus: cf. Tac. H. v 1, eiusdem anni
(70 A.D.) principio Caesar Titus perdomandae Iudaeae delectus a patre:
Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, Iudaeique (in pacem coacti) annitente filio Tito, quem
transgrediens in Italiam reliquerat externae militiae: Oros. vii 9, relictoque
in castris ad procurationem obsidionis Hierosolymorum filio Tito: Joseph.
Bell. Iud. iv 658, κατὰ τάχος τὰ κατὰ τὴν ᾿Αλεξάνδρειαν διώκει (Οὐεσπασιανός)
τὸν δ' υἱὸν Τίτον μετὰ τῆς ἐκκρίτου δυνάμεως ἀπέστειλεν ἐξαιρήσοντα Ἱεροσόλυμα.
Vespasian was proclaimed emperor by the legions in Egypt, Judaea, and
Syria in July, 69 (Vesp. 6, 3). Towards the close of that year he went to
Alexandria along with Titus.
Before setting out for Italy he made
arrangements for the occupation of Egypt, so that he could cut off the
corn-supply of Rome and compel Vitellius to surrender by famine (Tac.
H. iii 48). Titus was sent back to Palestine to conduct the siege of
Jerusalem.
Hierosolymorum: the name Ἱεροσόλυμα (Hierosolyma) for Jerusalem
seems to occur first in Hecataeus of Abdera, a contemporary of Alexander
the Great. It is used in the Apocrypha, while the form generally found
in the Septuagint is Ἱερουσαλήμ. The name Ἱεροσόλυμα was explained as
ἱερὸν Σολύμων, and this gave rise to the belief that the Jews were identical
with the Solymi (ancient dwellers in Lycia, mentioned by Homer and
Herodotus); cf. Tac. H. v 2, clara alii Iudaeorum initia, Solymos, carminibus Homeri celebratam gentem, conditae urbi Hierosolyma nomen e suo
fecisse.
..
duodecim confecit: Joseph. v 288, δώδεκα αὐτὸς τῶν προμάχων ἀναιρεῖ:
Eutrop. vii 21, 2, in oppugnatione Hierosolymorum sub patre militans
duodecim propugnatores duodecim sagittarum confixit ictibus.
cepit: the siege of Jerusalem by Titus began in the spring of 70 A.D.
and lasted over five months. The Temple with its treasures was destroyed
by fire, probably on Aug. 6, and on Sept. 2 the upper city, where the last
resistance was offered, was stormed by the Romans (Joseph. vi 260 sqq.,
393 sqq.).
ea: this is the reading of M; the other MSS. have eam (sc. urbem, to
be supplied κατὰ σύνεσιν from Hierosolymorum).
filiae: Julia; see on c. 4, 2.
imperatorem eum consalutaverint: Oros. vii 9, 6, Titus imperator ab
exercitu pronuntiatus: Joseph. vi 316, τὸν Τίτον μετὰ μεγίστων εὐφημιῶν
ἀπέφηναν αὐτοκράτορα (Joseph. says that this salutation by the soldiers took
place after the burning of the Temple). The title imperator (αὐτοκράτωρ)
was given by acclamation on the field of battle; e.g. Caes. B.C. ii 26,
Curio.. universi exercitus conclamatione imperator appellatur. The earliest
example is that of Scipio Africanus (209 B.c., Liv. xxvii 19). The last
occasion on which the honour of being acclaimed imperator was granted
to a private person was in 22 A.D., when Tiberius allowed it to Junius
Blaesus, proconsul of Africa; Tac. A. iii 74, Tiberius Blaeso tribuit ut
imperator a legionibus salutaretur prisco erga duces honore, qui bene gesta
re publica gaudio et impetu victoris exercitus conclamabantur... Concessit
quibusdam et Augustus id vocabulum, ac tunc Tiberius Blaeso postremum.
The Emperors were saluted in this way for victories gained either by
themselves or by their lieutenants (legati), and the number of these
salutations appeared in the list of their titles.
=
In
nec non et:
atque etiam, "and even"; cf. Calig. 40. In other
passages Suetonius uses nec non et merely as a copula ("and also") connecting individual terms or concepts (Vesp. 8, 2:18: Dom. 14, 1).
poetry and late prose nec non et is frequently used to connect sentences
(not individual words); e.g. Verg. G. ii 53, Aen. i 748, viii 461: Colum. viii
15, 6: Plin. N.H. vii 183, etc.: Quintil. ix 4, 25, etc. See KühnerStegmann, i 826 sq., on this and other combinations such as nec non etiam,
nec non .. quoque, nec non et quoque.
..
efflagitantes: Titus did not yield to the solicitations of the troops.
He broke up his army when his task in Judaea was accomplished. The
12th legion was sent back to Melitene on the Euphrates; the 10th was
left in Jerusalem; the 5th and 15th accompanied him to the various cities
which he visited in the eight months which elapsed before he returned to
Rome. Before setting out on his homeward voyage from Alexandria he
sent back these two legions to their earlier quarters, the 5th to Moesia
and the 15th to Pannonia (Joseph. B.I. vii 18–20, 117).
§ 3. suspicio quasi
temptasset: in post-Aug. writers quasi c. subj.
is used for the acc. c. inf. with verbs of saying, believing, accusing, etc.,
as well as with nouns such as fama, rumor, opinio, suspicio, the clause with
quasi having a strong subjective colouring (cf. Kühner-Stegmann, ii 456).
Suetonius uses this constr. freely; e.g. Tit. 8, 1, admonentibus domesticis,
quasi plura polliceretur quam praestare posset: Tib. 21, 2, scio vulgo
persuasum, quasi vox Augusti per cubicularios excepta sit: Aug. 94, 8,
somnium aliter exponunt, quasi Iuppiter demonstrasset: Aug. 28, 1,
obiectum sibi ab eo saepius, quasi per ipsum staret ne redderetur (res
publica): Dom. 22, erat fama, quasi develleret: Aug. 14, rumore dilato,
quasi necasset: Aug. 6, concepta opinione veteri, quasi temere adeuntibus
horror quidam et metus obiciatur. For similar uses of tamquam see on
Vitell. 16.
..
Alexandriam petens: when Jerusalem had been captured, Titus went
down to Caesarea on the sea. He was hindered from undertaking the
voyage to Rome immediately, as it was the winter season (70/71 A.D.).
He held celebrations of various kinds at Caesarea on the sea, Caesarea
Philippi, Berytus, and the cities of Syria. He then went by Antiochia to
Zeugma on the Euphrates, where he received an embassy from the Parthian
king Vologaesus (Vesp. 6, 4) who presented him with a golden crown for
his victory in Judaea. Finally, he set out for Egypt, visiting the ruins
of Jerusalem on his journey, and arrived at Alexandria at the beginning
of May, 71. There he embarked for Italy.
Memphim: the oldest capital of Egypt, about 15 miles south of
Cairo, on the western bank of the Nile.
Apide: Apis ("Απις, Egyptian Hapi "the hidden") was a sacred bull
worshipped with the greatest reverence by the Egyptians at Memphis
(Hdt. iii 27-29; Plut. Is. et Osir. 20, 29, 43, etc.; Lucian de sacrif. 15;
Pomp. Mel. i 9). He was regarded as the incarnation of the god Ptah,
or of Osiris, or of the Sun, and was connected with the river-god Nilus.
Fire was said to come down from heaven upon the cow, which thereupon
conceives Apis. The calf which is so called is black with a square spot
of white upon his forehead, and on his back the figure of an eagle; the
hairs in his tail are double, and there is a scarab or beetle upon his tongue
(Hdt. iii 28). The ceremony of consecrating the new-born bull is described
in Ael. Hist. An. xi 10, Diod. Sic. i 85, Plin. N.H. viii 71, Amm. Marc. xxii
14. He was not allowed to live for more than 25 years. If he died
before that age, he was splendidly entombed in a chamber under the
temple of Serapis at Memphis which was called the Serapeum. After
death he became Osiris-Apis (Osir-Hapi), the most probable origin of the
name Serapis (Sarapis); see on Vesp. 7, 1.
diadema gestavit: the wearing of a diadem suggested regal aspirations.
In its most general sense diadema was a synonym of taenia, vitta, fascia,
stemma, strophium, mitra, and the other Gr. and Lat. words denoting a
band encircling the head (Daremberg-Saglio, ii 119). It was used for the
band round the brow of priests and celebrants of religious rites. As a
symbol of sovereignty it was worn by Assyrian and Persian kings, by
Alexander (after his conquest of Darius), by the Diadochi, etc. The
diadema as a regni insigne (Cic. Ph. iii 5) was hated by the Romans and
refused by Caesar (Suet. Iul. 79, where it is described as a white band,
fascia candida). Caligula thought of assuming it and establishing a
regnum or absolute monarchy (Calig. 22, 1). In [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 35 we
are told that Aurelianus (270-275) was the first Roman emperor to wear a
diadem; but the first represented with it on coins is Constantine (306-337).
•
sequius: a comparative of the adv. secus (Tit. 11, Galb. 14, 1) from
sequor, lit. "following" "not attaining to" and so "inferior” “worse'';
cf. Tib. 2, 1, multa egregia merita, multa etiam sequius admissa in
rem p. extant. The form sequius is found first in Afran. 293 R., sin, id
quod non spero, ratio talis sequius ceciderit; it does not occur in class.
Lat. though secus does (e.g. Cic. Att. vi 2, 2, ne quid fiat secus quam
volumus), but is fairly common from Livy on. Distinguish sētius, which
is joined with non, nec, neque, nihilo, eo, and quo, and is equivalent to
minus (e.g. Vesp. 6, 2: Dom. 2, 2: Vitell. 10, 3). It is very doubtful
whether setius is connected with secus and sequius, though the Roman
grammarians regarded it as a byform of sequius; see Lindsay, Lat. Lang.
566: Zimmermann, Archiv Lexik. iv 604.
Regium: a town in the extreme S.W. of Italy on the Sicilian strait,
mod. Reggio di Calabria.
Puteolos: see on Vitell. 12.
inopinanti patri: Josephus (B.I. vii 119) says that his father was
expecting Titus and went forth to welcome him: τοῦ πλοῦ δ᾽ αὐτῷ κατὰ
νοῦν ἀνυσθέντος, ὁμοίως μὲν ἡ ῾Ρώμη περὶ τὴν ὑποδοχὴν εἶχε καὶ τὰς ὑπαντήσεις
ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τοῦ πατρός, λαμπρότερον δ᾽ ἦν Τίτῳ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ πατὴρ ὑπαντῶν καὶ
δεχόμενος.
=
arguens: redarguens, refellens, refutans; cf. Tac. A. iv 11, mihi
tradendi arguendique rumoris causa fuit, ut claro sub exemplo falsas
auditiones depellerem. This use of arguere is not found before Livy.
rumorum: the canards that he would not return to Italy, but would
found a new kingdom in the East.
temeritatem: = vanitatem "groundlessness” “idleness"; cf. Dom. 15,
3, ad coarguendam temeritatem artis (mathematicae). The relations
between Titus and Vespasian are examined exhaustively by Weynand
(Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2706 sqq.), and he shows that there is not the smallest
reason to assume any want of loyalty on the part of Titus towards his
father, or the existence of any friction between them. In the interview
which, according to Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vi 30), took place at Tarsus
between Titus and Apollonius of Tyana, the philosopher Apollonius congratulates Titus on his readiness to subordinate himself in all things to
his father and to render him homage.
=
..
CHAPTER 6.
participem imperii agere: so Tacitus (H. ii 83) describes Mucianus
as “socium magis imperii quam ministrum agens." For agere in the
sense of agere partes cf. Claud. 29, 1, non principem sed ministrum egit:
Tib. 12, 2, obnoxium et trepidum agit: 26, 2, privatum egit. Distinguish
agere se gerere se "to pass oneself off as"; Claud. 25, 1, libertini, qui
se pro equitibus R. agerent. For the position of the particeps (consors)
imperii in relation to the Princeps see on Tit. 9, 3, consortem successoremque.
Titus returned to Rome ἰσομοιρήσων τῆς ἀρχῆς τῷ πατρί (Philostr. l.c.). Bury
(Stud. Rom. Emp. p. 377) says: “Vespasian followed the example of
Augustus and the more recent example of Galba, in taking to himself a
consort in the Empire. Both the proconsular imperium and the tribunician
power were conferred on his son Titus at the same time, and thus Titus
held a position like that which Tiberius held in the last years of Augustus.
The object of Vespasian was not to lighten his own labours, but to secure
the succession for his son. Titus was allowed to assume more of the
imperial privileges than had been conceded to any consort before. He
wore the laurel wreath and vota were offered in his name. He also
styled himself Imperator; but while Vespasian used this title as a
praenomen, Titus bore it as a cognomen (Titus Caesar Imperator
Vespasianus)." The difficulties connected with the varying application of
the title Imperator to Titus on coins and in inscriptions during his father's
reign are discussed by Weynand (Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2708 sqq.); Schiller,
Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit i 508; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 1154.
21
..
triumphavit censuramque gessit una: see Vesp. 8, 1 (notes).
collega in tribunicia potestate: marking him as Vespasian's successor.
The tribunicia potestas had previously been shared by Augustus, first with
Agrippa and then with Tiberius, and by Tiberius with Drusus; cf. Tac.
A. iii 56, Tiberius
mittit litteras ad senatum, queis potestatem
tribuniciam Druso petebat. Id summi fastigii vocabulum Augustus
repperit, ne regis aut dictatoris nomen adsumeret ac tamen appellatione
aliqua cetera imperia praemineret. Marcum deinde Agrippam socium eius
potestatis, quo defuncto Tiberium Neronem delegit, ne successor in incerto
foret. See also on Vesp. 12.
septem consulatibus: in 70, 72, 74-77, 79 A.D.; cf. Vesp. 8, 1. Pliny
(N.H. praef. 3), addressing Titus, says: Triumphalis et censorius tu,
sexiesque consul, ac tribuniciae potestatis particeps: et quod his nobilius
fecisti dum illud patri pariter et equestri ordini praestas, praefectus praetorio
eius. Pliny's work was published in 77 A.D.
orationes in senatu recitaret: Vespasian used both his sons (Titus
and Domitian) for this purpose according to Dio lxvi 10, ὅσα μὴ ἐδύνατο
αὐτὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ γήρως ἀναλέγεσθαι, ἢ καὶ ὅσα ἀπὼν ἐπέστελλε τῇ βουλῇ, διὰ τῶν υἱέων
αὐτοῦ ὡς τὸ πολὺ ἐκέλευεν ἀναγιγνώσκεσθαι, τιμῶν κὰν τούτῳ αὐτήν. For orationes
see on Dom. 2, 3.
quaestoris vice: the principal duty of those quaestors who were
nominated by the emperor (quaestores Caesaris, see on Vitell. 1, 2) was to
read to the senate communications from him; cf. Aug. 65, 2, libello per
quaestorem recitato notum senatui fecit: Dio liv 25, τὸ βιβλίον τῷ ταμίᾳ
(quaestori) ἀναγνῶναι δούς : Tac. A. xvi 27, oratio principis per quaestorem
eius audita est. Nero departed from the usual custom; Suet. Ner. 15, 2,
orationes ad senatum missas, praeterito quaestorum officio, per consulem
plerumque recitabat. Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 569.
praefecturam praetorii: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 9, 10, (Titum) victorem
praefectura praetorio extulerat (Vespasianus). Unde etiam is honos, ingens
a principio, tumidior atque alter ab Augusto imperio fuit. For an account
of this office see on c. 4, 2. Suetonius is inaccurate in saying that Titus
was the first prefect who was not an eques, for Arrecinus Clemens (see
Dom. 11, 1), who was appointed by Mucianus before the arrival of Vespasian
in Rome in the autumn of 70, was a senator; Tac. H. iv 68 Arrecinum
Clementem praetorianis praeposuit, dictitans
ipsum, quamquam
senatorii ordinis, ad utraque munia (i.e. the duties of senator and prefect)
sufficere. Augustus had followed the advice of Maecenas in ordaining that
these prefects should be equites. M. Aurelius lamented that he could not
make Pertinax praefectus praetorii because he was a senator (Capitol.
Pert. 2). Alexander Severus made it his practice to promote his prefects
of the guard to the rank of senator, in order that they might belong to
the class of Viri Clarissimi and be so addressed (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 21).
..
egit: sc. praefecturam; cf. Tib. 24, 1, principatum agere.
incivilius: cf. Flor. i 26, altius se et incivilius efferens. See note on
"civile,” Vesp. 9, 2. incivilis and inciviliter are post-class.
summissis: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 4, praefecturam praetorianam patre
imperante adeptus, suspectum quemque et oppositum sibi, immissis, qui per
theatra et castris invidiosa iactantes ad poenam poscerent, quasi criminis
convictos oppressit. Suetonius uses summittere in the sense of sending
secretly, e.g. Galb. 23; also in the sense of suborning (subornare, ὑφιέναι),
e.g. Ner. 28, 1, Acten libertam paulum afuit quin iusto sibi matrimonio
coniungeret, summissis consularibus viris qui regio genere ortam peierarent.
theatra: in the theatres and circus the people, accustomed to call
for their favourite actors and gladiators, often indulged in outbursts of
political feeling and clamorously demanded reforms, executions, etc.
Cicero mentions such demonstrations in his day (e.g. Att. i 16, Sest. 54,
115); and under the Empire, when public assemblies were abolished, the
gatherings of the people in the theatres and at other shows became the
regular occasions of giving expression to public demands. Cf. Dom. 13, 1;
Тас. Н. i 32, 72; A. vi 13. Tiberius avoided the shows on account of this
licence: Tib. 47, Neque spectacula omnino edidit; et iis quae ab aliquo
ederentur rarissime interfuit, ne quid exposceretur. See Hardy on Plut.
Galb. 17, & ῾Ῥωμαίων δῆμος . ἐν πᾶσι θεάτροις καὶ σταδίοις αἰτούμενος ἐκεῖνον (i.e.
demanding the execution of Tigellinus; cf. Suet. Galb. 15, 2).
§2. Aulum Caecinam: Aulus Caecina Alienus was quaestor in
Hispania Baetica in 68 A.D., the year of Nero's death. He was one of the
first to side with Galba, who gave him the command of a legion in Upper
Germany; but shortly afterwards Galba ordered his prosecution for
peculation, and Caecina, to be revenged, induced his troops to declare for
Vitellius (Tac. H. i 53). He was chosen general by Vitellius and led an
army into Italy, taking part in the battle of Betriacum. When Vitellius
took possession of Rome, Caecina was made consul (Sept. 1, 69). Later
he was sent by Vitellius to meet Antonius Primus and the Flavian forces,
but he proved a traitor (see note on “proditus,” Vitell. 15, 2).
(lxvi 16) agrees with Suetonius that Titus had Caecina assassinated on
account of his revolutionary designs against Vespasian: 'Αλιηνὸς μὲν αὐτοῦ
ἐν τῷ βασιλείῳ, ἐξαναστὰς ἐκ τοῦ συσσιτίου, εὐθὺς ἀπεσφάγη, τοῦ Τίτου κελεύσαντος,
μὴ καὶ φθάσῃ τι τῆς νυκτός νεοχμῶσαι· τῶν γὰρ στρατιωτῶν συχνοὺς προπαρεσκεύαστο.
In [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 4 a different reason is assigned: Caecinam consularem adhibitum cenae, vixdum triclinio egressum, ob suspicionem
stupratae Berenices uxoris suae iugulari iussit.
chirographum: see on c. 3, 2.
Dio
apud milites contionis: sc. habendae. Cf. Tac. Dial. 41, quid opus est
multis apud populum contionibus?
The variant coniurationis has been
generally rejected since Casaubon's ed.
plurimum contraxit invidiae: cf. Vesp. 4, 4, gravissimam contraxit
offensam: Sen. Ep. 87, 31, divitiae
neu
invidiam contrahunt: Curt. viii 5,
invidiam tali adulatione contraheres: Justin v 2, sed apud
Lacedaemonios virtus Alcibiadis plus invidiae quam gratiae contraxit.
non temere: from meaning "not lightly or casually” “not without
good reason” (Gr. οὐκ ἐτός), non temere came to be used in the sense of
non facile, vix, hardly” “scarcely” (Germ. nicht leicht). This occurs
e.g. in Cic. Q. Fratr. i 1, 13, Caes. B.G. iv 20, Nep. Att. 20, Liv. ii 61, 4.
See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. ii 587. Suetonius uses non temere in this
way over twenty times, e.g. Tit. 8, 3; Dom. 19 and 21; Vesp. 15.
adverso rumore: the opposite phrase secundo rumore is as old as Ennius
(Ann. 262, populi rumore secundo). Livy and Tacitus use esse adverso
rumore (abl. of quality); e.g. Liv. xxvii 20, Romae Marcellus etiam
adverso rumore esse: Tac. A. xiv 11, sed adverso rumore Seneca erat,
212
quod oratione tali confessionem scripsisset: H. ii 26, apud paucos ea ducis
ratio probata, in vulgus adverso rumore fuit; cf. Suet. Iul. 2, secundiore
fama fuit.
CHAPTER 7.
..
saevitiam
luxuria
libido: cf. the description of the youthful
Nero, Ner. 26, 1, petulantiam, libidinem, luxuriam, avaritiam, crudelitatem
sensim quidem primo et occulte et velut iuvenili errore exercuit, sed ut
tunc quoque dubium nemini foret naturae illa vitia, non aetatis esse.
comissationes: cf. Vitell. 13, 1: Dom. 21 (п.).
profusissimo: profusus “extravagant" is used (a) of persons, as
here and Ner. 4, arrogans, profusus, immitis; (b) of things, e.g. Tit. 7, 2,
convivia profusa: Vitell. 10, 2, inter profusissimos opsoniorum apparatus.
Both uses are found in Cicero; e.g. Quinct. 12, perditus ac profusus nepos:
Mur. 36 profusae epulae.
exoletorum: = cinaedorum; see on Galb. 22.
spadonum: Dio lxvii 2, καὶ ὁ Τίτος ἰσχυρῶς περὶ τοὺς ἐκτομίας ἐσπουδάκει.
Cf. Dom. 7, 1.
Berenices amorem: Тас. Н. ii 2, Fuerunt qui (Titum) accensum
desiderio Berenices reginae vertisse iter (see Tit. 5, 1) crederent. Neque
abhorrebat a Berenice iuvenilis animus; sed gerendis rebus nullum ex eo
impedimentum. Laetam voluptatibus adolescentiam egit, suo quam patris
imperio ("reign'") moderatior: Dio lxvi 15, Βερενίκη δὲ ἰσχυρῶς τε ἤνθει,
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἐς τὴν ῾Ρώμην μετὰ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ τοῦ ᾿Αγρίππα ἦλθε. καὶ ὁ μὲν
στρατηγικῶν τιμῶν ἠξιώθη, ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ Παλατίῳ ᾤκησε, καὶ τῷ Τίτῳ συνεγίγνετο,
προσεδόκα δὲ γαμηθήσεσθαι αὐτῷ, καὶ πάντα ἤδη ὡς καὶ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ οὖσα ἐποίει,
ὥστ᾽ ἐκεῖνον δυσχεραίνοντας τοὺς ῾Ρωμαίους ἐπὶ τούτοις ᾐσθημένον ἀποπέμψασθαι
αὐτήν; ib. c. 18, Τίτος οὐδὲν
ἐρωτικὸν μοναρχήσας ἔπραξεν, ἀλλὰ σώφρων,
καίτοι καὶ τῆς Βερενίκης ἐς ῾Ρώμην αὖθις ἐλθούσης, ἐγένετο. Julia Berenice was
a daughter of Agrippa I, king of the Jews, and was born in 28 A.D. After
a brief early marriage to Marcus, son of the alabarch Alexander, she
wedded her uncle Herod, and on his death in 48 she lived (incestuously?)
with her brother Agrippa II. The apostle Paul appeared before them in
60 (Acts 25, 26). She and her brother tried to dissuade the Jews from
rebellion, and after the war broke out they seem to have lived in the
Roman camp. She was a warm supporter of Vespasian; cf. Tac. H. ii 81,
nec minore animo regina Berenice partes iuvabat, florens aetate formaque
et seni quoque Vespasiano magnificentia munerum grata. In 75 she came
to Rome along with her brother, and lived with Titus as though she were
his wife. Juvenal (vi 157) mentions a diamond ring of hers on sale at
Rome: adamans notissimus et Berenices | in digito factus pretiosior: hunc
dedit olim | barbarus incestae, dedit hunc Agrippa sorori.
quod constabat: Trachmann (op. cit. p. 26), commenting on the use
of the indic. here, though quod . . extenderet precedes, says: Bene modum
mutavit
Neque enim hoc ipsum “constare” eorum, quibus rapacitas
suspecta erat, sententia affertur, sed illud “solitum esse,” ita ut haec
sit enuntiati conformatio: suspecta rapacitas, quod, ut constabat, solitus
esset. See also on Dom. 10, 3, quod ferebatur.
..
Ursinus
cognitionibus: restored by Torrentius for contionibus.
proposed negotiationibus; Boden cocionibus; Cornelissen auctionibus.
Cognitio in the special sense was a legal term for a iudicium extra
ordinem, a hearing of a case not in the ordinary courts but by the emperor,
the senate, or magistrates commissioned by them, such as provincial
governors; cf. Claud. 15, 1, negantem cognitionis rem sed ordinarii iuris
esse. In Plin. Ep. vi 31 we have examples of the variety of cognitiones
conducted by Trajan aided by assessors (of whom Pliny was one), and in
Ep. x 96 Pliny mentions cognitiones de Christianis by provincial governors.
Cognitio was also used at times in the wider sense of iudicium, any
ordinary trial (ius ordinarium).
nundinari: Titus trafficked in the influence which he could use with
his father to have a case decided in a certain way. For the metaph. use
of nundinari in the sense of illicit trafficking by selling or buying cf.
Apul. Met. x 33, iudices sententias suas pretio nundinantur: Cic. Verr. i
119, qui ab isto ius ad utilitatem suam nundinarentur: Cic. Phil. iii 4,
una in domo omnes, quorum intererat, totum imperium populi Romani
nundinabantur.
=
praemiari:
praemia pacisci (Baumg.-Cr.), "to stipulate for a
reward." The word is not cited from any other author, but praemiati has
been suggested as a correction of praeminate in a corrupt line of Novius
(Ribb. Com. Rom. Frag. p. 257).
=
alium:
alterum, “a second"; cf. Tac. H. iv 73, ne quis alius
Ariovistus regno Galliarum potiretur: Curt. ix 8, alium Liberum patrem
adventare credebant: Val. Max. v 4, alius Cicero: Plin. Ep. ii 13, alius
pater. This use of alius is post-class.; see Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 132:
Draeger, Hist. Synt. i² 105.
Neronem: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 5, Iurgia autem sub patre venumdata;
rapinarum cupidum; unde Neronem cuncti opinantes vocantesque summam
rerum nactum graviter acceperant.
pro bono cessit: "turned out to his advantage"; cf. Sall. Iug. 22,
populum Romanum neque recte neque pro bono ("to their advantage'')
facturum, si etc. "Cedere pro aliqua re” meant to go for (to be counted
as),'' e.g. Tac. Germ. 14, epulae . pro stipendio cedunt (see Thes. Ling.
Lat. iii 732). Suetonius might have used in bonum cessit; cf. Plin. N.H.
xviii 110, montium culpa in bonum cedit: Sen. Ep. 71, mala in bonum
abibunt: Cic. Brut. 141, hoc vitium huic uni in bonum convertebat.
..
conversa in maximas laudes: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 6, sed haec in
melius conversa adeo ei immortalem gloriam contulere, ut deliciae atque
amor humani generis appellaretur.
•
§ 2. convivia iucunda magis quam profusa: like the dinners of
Augustus, Aug. 74, cenam ternis ferculis ("courses”) aut cum abundissime
senis praebebat, ut non nimio sumptu, ita summa comitate.
amicos elegit, quibus usi: the term amici is not used here in the
general sense of those admitted to receptions at court (salutationes, see
Vesp. 4, 4); it denotes the trusted confidants and advisers (consiliarii) of
Titus; cf. Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 835, n. 3. Similarly Pliny (Pan. 88)
says of the imperial freedmen of Trajan: neminem in usu habes nisi aut
tibi aut patri tuo aut optimo cuique principum (especially Titus) dilectum.
adquieverunt: adquiescere is used by Suetonius (1) of finding peace
or comfort in, Calig. 51, 3, uno solacio adquiescens; (2) of taking delight
in, Tib. 56, convictores Graeculos quibus (dat.) vel maxime adquiescebat;
(3) of being satisfied with, content to rely upon, as here and in Vitell. 14,
5, vaticinante Chatta muliere, cui velut oraculo adquiescebat; (4) of being
content to devote one's whole attention to something, Tib. 31, negante eo
destinatos magistratus abesse oportere, ut praesentes honori (i.e. their
office) adquiescerent (Bentley and Mommsen would read adsuescerent).
•
Berenicen dimisit: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 7, Denique, ut subiit
pondus regium, Berenicen nuptias suas sperantem regredi domum, et
enervatorum greges abire praecepit. Quo facto, quasi signum protulit
mutatae intemperantiae. According to Dio (quoted above on "Berenices
amorem''), Titus sent away Berenice during his father's reign, when he
saw that the Roman people were displeased at the way in which she
behaved as if she were already his wife; she returned to Rome when he
became emperor, but he would not yield to her blandishments.
The dismissal of Berenice by the emperor Titus is the theme of Racine's Bérénice,
which is thus summarised by Victor Hugo: Acti Titus Act ii reginam
Berenicen Act iii invitus Act iv invitam Act v dimisit. By his action Titus
"freed Rome from the danger of a second Cleopatra" (von Domaszewski,
Gesch. der röm. Kaiser, ii 155).
delicatorum: both delicatus and delicata (Vesp. 3) were used in the
sense of deliciae; cf. Petron. Satyr. 63, ipsimi nostri delicatus decessit
("my master's favourite died'').
quanquam: Suet. uses quanquam (a) c. subjunct. (never c. indic.),
see on Galb. 14, 1, quanquam
daret; (b) c. ptc., e.g. Galb. 19, 1, qu.
haud dissimulans; (c) c. abl. abs., e.g. Vesp. 2, 2, qu. fratre adepto latum
clavum; (d) c. abl. qual., e.g. Tit. 3, 1, qu. neque procera statura et ventre
paulo proiectiore; (e) c. gen. qual., e.g. Ner. 20, 1, qu. exiguae vocis et
fuscae; (f) c. adject., e.g. Aug. 8, 1, qu. expers belli; (g) c. subst., e.g.
Claud. 35, 1, qu. iactator; (h) c. prep., Aug. 27, 5, qu. sine censurae honore.
There is only one instance in Cic. of quanquam without a finite verb;
Fin. v 68, si omnia illa, quae sunt extra, quanquam expetenda, summo bono
continerentur (to avoid the repetition of sunt). For instances in other
authors see Draeger, Hist. Synt. ii² 815; Kühner-Stegmann, ii 445.
=
tam artifices saltationis: for the gen. with artifex (adj. peritus)
cf. Cic. Orat. 161, quod si indocta consuetudo tam est artifex suavitatis:
Sall. Iug. 35, per homines talis negotii artifices: Suet. Calig. 32, 1, miles
decollandi ("beheading") artifex. Bentley would read artificis, taking
the adj. in a passive sense.
ut scaenam tenuerint: cf. Euseb.-Hieron. Chron., ad a. 1974 (43 в.с.),.
Publilius mimographus, natione Syrus, scaenam tenet (Teuffel-Schwabe,
Röm. Lit. 212, 3). tenere scaenam means “to hold the stage, to dominate
it to the exclusion of others." These delicati of Titus probably appeared
on the stage as pantomimi, dancers depicting by movements and gestures
(Dom. 8, 3) dramatic situations of various kinds; cf. Friedlaender,
Sitteng. ii¹º 125 sqq.
=
non modo sed: see on Galb. 22.
prolixius: there does not seem to be any authority for taking this as
amplius, diutius (“to cherish any longer," Rolfe); it must bear its
ordinary meaning of liberalius (Baumg.-Cr.).
..
spectare supersedit: the use of the inf. with supersedeo (= abstineo)
is first found in the historian Sisenna (ob. 67 B.c.); not in Caes. or Cic.;
frequent in Livy and later writers.
in publico coetu: Torrentius deleted coetu, and Burman regarded it
as having originated from the last syllable of publico and the first of
supersedit. Suetonius uses in publico for "in public" in Claud. 13, 1;
38, 2: Ner. 27, 2; 39, 3. There is no other instance of in publico coetu.
§ 3. nulli civium quicquam ademit: cf. Plin. Pan. 27, nihil largiatur
Princeps, dum nihil auferat.
abstinuit alieno: cf. Plin. Ep. vi 8, Atilius Crescens alieni abstinentissimus, sui diligens (contrast Sall. Cat. 5, L. Catilina alieni appetens, sui
profusus): Tac. H. i 49, Galba pecuniae alienae non appetens, suae parcus,
publicae avarus. So abstinentia (ἐγκράτεια χρημάτων) is opposed to avaritia
and rapacitas; e.g. Dom. 9, 1:10, 1:23, 2.
ut si quis umquam: Ernesti would omit ut, but there is as unusual a
pleonasm in Claud. 21, 5, immixtis interdum frigidis et arcessitis iocis:
qualis est ut cum Palumbum (“The Dove," name of a gladiator) postulantibus daturum se promisit, si captus esset (Ernesti rejects qualis est as
a gloss on ut). Cf. also Vesp. 7, 2, ut scilicet. In Xen. Anab. ii 6, 8
some MSS. have ἱκανός, ὡς εἴ τις καὶ ἄλλος, φροντίζειν ἦν. Plutarch and later
writers use ὡς οἷον, ὡς οἷα, etc.
ne concessas quidem conlationes recepit: in the case of some of
the earlier emperors Suetonius mentions conlationes, either freely given or
as involuntary as English “benevolences.” For a free-will offering cf.
Aug. 57, 2, In restitutionem Palatinae domus, incendio absumptae, veterani,
decuriae, tribus, atque etiam singillatim e cetero genere hominum, libenter
ac pro facultate quisque contulerunt. The compulsory conlatio is illustrated by Ner. 38, 3 (after the burning of Rome), conlationibus non receptis
modo verum et efflagitatis provincias privatorumque census prope exhausit:
Ner. 44, 2, In praeparanda expeditione (against Vindex) partem census
omnes ordines conferre iussit, et insuper inquilinos privatarum aedium;
atque insularum (‘lodging-houses'") pensionem annuam repraesentare (i.e.
to pay a year's rent at once) fisco. Caligula, when his daughter was born,
pleaded poverty and received conlationes for the girl's maintenance and
dowry (Calig. 42). On New Year's day all the citizens brought a strena
or "luck-penny" to the emperor (Aug. 57, Tib. 34, Calig. 42). Pliny
(Pan. 41) mentions “conlationes remisisse" among Trajan's benefactions;
this presumably refers to the aurum coronarium which was paid by the
provincials and others on the occasion of an emperor's accession, any
great victory, or any important event in the imperial house; the payment
of it was remitted by Hadrian, Alexander Severus, and Julian, as it had
been by Augustus (in 29 B.C.) in the case of the Italian municipia and
coloniae.
nemine: for this form see on Vitell. 17, 1.
amphitheatro: the Colosseum, see Vesp. 9, 1. It was dedicated in
80 A.D. by Titus with a festival lasting 100 days.
thermis: these baths of Titus were probably built, not on the ruins,
but in a garden or park, of the Aurea Domus of Nero which extended
from the Palatine to the Esquiline (see Oth. 7, 1). They were connected
with the Flavian amphitheatre by a portico, traces of which can still be
seen. It was near the site of these thermae that the famous group of
Laocoon and his sons was found. The earliest thermae under the Empire
were those bequeathed to Rome by M. Agrippa in the reign of Augustus.
These were followed by those of Nero, Titus, Trajan, Caracalla, Diocletian,
and Constantine. See Marquardt, Privatl.2 275 sqq.; Jordan-Huelsen,
Topogr. Rom i 3, 307 sqq. thermae, as distinct from balneae (ordinary
bathing-rooms or houses), were luxurious establishments on the model of
the Greek γυμνάσιον, containing, besides hot and vapour baths, all the
equipment for gymnastic exercises, colonnaded halls (exedrae) where
philosophers and poets congregated, etc.
celeriter: this correction by Calderinus of celebriter is based on Mart.
Spect. 2, 7, Hic ubi miramur velocia munera thermas, | abstulerat miseris
tecta superbus ager (i.e. Nero's proud domain had robbed the poor of
their dwellings).
munus edidit: munus edere (more rarely dare) was the regular phrase
for giving a gladiatorial show, the giver being called editor by the
writers of the Historia Augusta. So edere (dare) gladiatores (spectaculum gladiatorium). See also on munerarius in Dom. 10, 1.
apparatissimum largissimumque: cf. Cic. Sest. 54, ludi apparatissimi
et magnificentissimi.
in veteri naumachia: naumachia was used in two senses: (1) a Roman
representation of a sea-fight (navale proelium); (2) as here, the place
where the representation was given (= navale stagnum, Stat. S. iv 4, 5:
Tac. A. xiv 15). The first public naumachia was exhibited by Julius
Caesar (46 B.c.) in a district called Codeta Minor, prob. in the Campus
Martius near the Tiber (Suet. Iul. 39, Dio xliii 23). The second was a
representation by Augustus (2 B.C.) of the battle of Salamis in a new
basin (1800 × 1200 ft., Mon. Ancyr. 23) dug in the Transtiberine region
and surrounded by a grove called the nemus Caesarum after the young
Lucius and Gaius (Aug. 43). The third was a splendid spectacle by
Claudius (52 A.D.) on Lake Fucinus (Claud. 21: Tac. A. xii 56). Nero's
naumachiae are mentioned in Dio lxi 9, lxii 15; they were held either in
the amphitheatre or in the stagna Neronis, a huge basin in the grounds
of Nero's Golden House. Titus exhibited two sea-fights, the one mentioned
here in the vetus naumachia of Augustus, which continued in use after
others had been made, and the other (between the Corcyraeans and
Corinthians) in the flooded arena of the new amphitheatre (Dio lxvi 25:
Mart. Spect. 24). Domitian had a new and larger lake dug below the
Vatican, and also gave a naumachia in the Flavian amphitheatre (Dom. 4:
Dio lxvii 8).
ibidem et gladiatores: in his account of the spectacles exhibited by
Titus in the vetus naumachia Dio (lxvi 25) says that on the first day the
basin was partly covered with planks supported on piles, and it furnished
an arena for gladiatorial contests and a venatio (wild-beast hunt); on the
second day, the basin being drained, there was a chariot-race; on the
third, the basin being refilled, there was a naval battle of 3000 Athenians
and Syracusans, in the course of which the Athenians landed on an island
in the basin and took a fort there. These diverse spectacles are lauded
by Martial, Spect. 28: Quidquid et in Circo spectatur et Amphitheatro,
id dives, Caesar, praestitit unda tibi. | Fucinus et diri taceantur stagna
Neronis: | hanc norint unam saecula naumachiam.
...
quinque milia
ferarum: Eutrop. vii 21, Romae amphitheatrum
aedificavit, et quinque milia ferarum in dedicatione eius occidit. The
total of wild and tame animals killed was 9000 according to Dio (l.c.). In
the 26 venationes given by Augustus 3,500 African wild beasts were slain:
Mon. Ancyr. 22, Venationes bestiarum Africanarum meo nomine aut
filiorum meorum et nepotum in circo aut in foro aut in amphitheatris
populo dedi sexiens et viciens, quibus confecta sunt bestiarum circiter tria
milia et quingentae. At the celebration of Trajan's second Dacian triumph
(107 A.D.) 11,000 animals were slain. For other examples see Friedlaender,
Sitteng. ii10 81.
omne genus: cf. Dom. 4, 5, omne genus rerum missilia sparsit: Claud. 34,
2, de fabrorum ac ministrorum atque id genus numero. Originally id genus,
omne genus, etc., stood in apposition to the nom. or acc., but from Varro's
time are joined with other cases in a purely adverbial fashion; e.g. Varr.
R.R. iii 9, 17, aliis id genus rebus: Lucr. vi 917, hoc genus in rebus. So
quod genus = cuius generis; e.g. Cic. Inv. ii 157, quod genus pecunia est.
Suetonius uses another adverbial acc. in Gramm. 4, 2, alia hoc genus; and
in Aug. 44, 3, muliebre secus omne, Gronovius' conjecture omnes seems
right. Cf. also illud aetatis in Galb. 14, 2.
CHAPTER 8.
dehinc: sometimes so used in post-Aug. writers referring to a point
in past time "from that time on” “thenceforward,” inde ab hoc, Germ.
von da an, von dem an; cf. Calig. 58, 2, duplex dehinc fama est (= de
rebus quae inde ab eo tempore factae sunt, duplex est fama). See Hand
'Tursell. ii 231.
beneficia: Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 1126, shows by numerous examples
that beneficia (τιμαί) was the technical term for the advantageous rights
bestowed by the emperor on communities, classes, and individuals, such as
the free occupation of State lands, and exemptions of various kinds. These
beneficia were revocable by the emperor who granted them, and became
invalid at his death. At first they were only renewed after a separate
examination of each case by his successor.
aliter rata non haberent: rata, which was supplied by Egnatius, gives
excellent sense and would easily have been lost after aliter.
Alexander
proposed to omit principibus and to read beneficia a superioribus concessa
<aseconcessa> aliter non haberent.
uno confirmavit edicto: Dio lxvi 19, πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πρός τε τὸ ἀσφαλές
καὶ πρὸς τὸ ἄλυπον τῶν ἀνθρώπων κατεστήσατο. καὶ γὰρ γράμματα ἐξέθηκε,
βεβαιῶν πάντα τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν προτέρων αὐτοκρατόρων δοθέντα τισίν, ὥστε μὴ καθ'
ἑκάστους σφῶν αἰτοῦντας αὐτὸν πράγματα ἔχειν: Aur. Vict. Caes. 10, 2, denique
cum concessa per priores principes firmari ab insequentibus mos esset, simul
imperium cepit, talia possidentibus edicto sponte cavit. The edicts of the
emperors were a continuation of the magisterial edicts of Republican
times. Sometimes they contained a definite command, sometimes a mere
communication or exhortation or remonstrance (cf. Mommsen, ii 905;
Hardy on Plin. Ep. x 58). Augustus used them even to answer lampoons:
iocis quorundam invidiosis aut petulantibus lacessitus, contradixit edicto
(Aug. 56, 1, where see Shuckburgh). Claudius issued as many as 20 in a
day, one being "ut uberi vinearum proventu bene dolia picarentur,
(Claud. 16, 4). The innovation of Titus in confirming previous beneficia
by one general edict was followed by subsequent emperors. Pliny (Ep. x
58) has recorded in full the edict of Nerva; Domitian's is mentioned by
Dio (lxvii 2), and that of Marcus Aurelius by his son Commodus (quoted
in Dig. xxvii 1, 8).
..
:
hominum: Bentley ingeniously suggested that this is a corruption
of hunc morem; cf. Ner. 15, 1, cognoscendi morem eum tenuit, ut
Galb. 4, 4, morem obstinatissime retinuit, ut On the other hand, homines
is often used by Suetonius for the people" "the emperor's subjects";
e.g. Ner. 39, 1, mirum fuerit nihil eum patientius quam maledicta et
convicia hominum tulisse. Bentley would further alter tenuit ne to tenuit
ut ne, which is quite needless.
tenuit, ne : "held firmly to his rule of not..." Livy and later
writers use tenere with ut or ne in the sense of carrying one's point; e.g.
Liv. ii 42, 2, tenuere patres, ut Fabius consul crearetur: iv 30, 16, plebs
tenuit, ne consules in proximum annum crearentur: Plin. Ep. vi 5, scripseram tenuisse Varenum ut sibi evocare testes liceret.
admonentibus domesticis: cf. Vesp. 22, admonente dispensatore.
quasi plura polliceretur: for quasi see on c. 5, 3.
tristem discedere: Eutrop. vii 21, facilitatis et liberalitatis tantum
fuit, ut, cum nulli quicquam negaret et ab amicis reprehenderetur, responderit nullum tristem debere ab imperatore discedere: Cedrenus (p. 178),
ἀπὸ βασιλέως δεῖ σκυθρωπὸν μὴ ἀποπέμπεσθαι. For tristis used of a disappointed
applicant cf. Lucr. iii 997, Qui petere a populo fasces saevasque secures |
imbibit et semper victus tristisque recedit.
super cenam: "over" i.e. "during" dinner. Cf. Germ. über Tische,
über Tafel; Gr. ἐπὶ δείπνῳ, ἐπὶ κύλικι (Baumg.-Cr.). super in a temporal
sense (= inter) is post-Aug. and found only in a few phrases: super cenam
(11 times in Suet., e.g. Vesp. 22: Vitell. 12: Dom. 14, 1:21; Curt. viii 43:
Plin. Ep. iii 5, etc.: Juv. xv 14); super mensam (Curt. vii 4); super
mensas et pocula (Flor. iv 2, 69); super vinum et epulas (Curt. viii 4);
super hos divum .. honores (Stat. Th. i 676).
recordatus
=
=
quod praestitisset: the use of quod instead of the
acc. and inf. is fully discussed by Madvig (Opusc. Acad. ii 232 sqq.) and
Kühner-Stegmann (ii 274 sqq.). There are a few apparent instances in
old Lat.: Plaut. Asin. 52, scio iam filius quod amet meus istanc meretricem
(where Brix takes quod amet as amicam): Cato in Plin. N.H. 29, 14,
quod bonum sit illorum litteras inspicere, non perdiscere, vincam (where
some explain quod bonum sit as quid boni sit). In class. Lat. there is
no sure instance. The first certain example is in Auct. Bell. Hisp. 36,
renuntiarunt quod Pompeium in potestate haberent. In post-class. times
it occurs in Petron. 71, scis, quod epulum dedi: Plin. Ep. ii 11, 6,
adnotatum experimentis, quod ... habent: Justin i 7, 9, cognito quod
inlatum Croeso bellum esset: Tac. A. xiv 6, reputans ideo se fallacibus
litteris accitam et praecipuo honore habitam, quodque litus iuxta non ventis
acta navis concidisset (where quodque may be taken as et id, quod).
From the middle of the 2nd cent. it occurs with increasing frequency in
Apuleius, Gellius, the Scriptores Hist. Aug., Eutropius, Ammianus, and the
=
Christian writers. The use in Gr. of οἵνεκα, ὁθούνεκα, διότι instead of ὅτι
with verba sentiendi and declarandi is similar.
memorabilem vocem: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 9, Quadam etiam die,
recordans vesperi nihil se cuiquam praestitisse, venerando caelestique dicto
"Amici,” ait, “perdidimus diem”: quia erat magnificae liberalitatis:
Themistius Orat. vi, Τίτου τοῦ γενναίου τὸ λαμπρὸν καὶ μέγα ἐκεῖνο ῥῆμα, ὅτι
Τήμερον οὐκ ἐβασίλευσα· οὐδὲν γὰρ εὖ ἐποίησα: Zonaras xi 18, Τούτου ἐστὶ καὶ
ἡ ἀοίδιμος ἐκείνη φωνή, εἰπόντος: σήμερον οὐκ ἐβασίλευσα, ἐπεὶ οὐδένα εὐηργέτησα.
Ausonius, Grat. Act. xvi, says that the fame of the utterance was due to
the contrast of such generosity with the meanness of Vespasian: Celebre
fuit Titi Caesaris dictum, perdidisse se diem, quo nihil boni fecerat; sed
celebre fuit, quia Vespasiani successor dixerat, cuius nimia parsimonia et
austeritas vix ferenda miram fecerat filii lenitatem.
diem perdidi: since Eutropius (vii 21, 3) gives the utterance as
“amici, hodie diem perdidi" (so too Euseb.-Hieron. Chron.) and Themistius
and Zonaras have τήμερον and σήμερον, Casaubon would read hodie diem
here. Hase quotes from the speech of Titus in Racine's Bérénice (iv 4):
“Où sont ces heureux jours que je faisais attendre? | Quels pleurs ai-je
séchés? Dans quels yeux satisfaits | Ai-je déjà goûté le fruit de mes
bienfaits? | L'univers a-t-il vu changer ses destinées? | Sais-je combien le
ciel m'a compté de journées? | Et de ce peu de jours, si longtemps
attendus, | Ah! malheureux! combien j'en ai déjà perdus!”
Pliny
(Pan. 56) in his flattery of Trajan says that he did not let even a moment
pass without some benefaction: Quod momentum, quod immo temporis
punctum, aut beneficio sterile, aut vacuum laude? So too Ausonius (l.c.)
says to Gratianus: "Neque vero unum aliquod bonum uno die praestas,
sed indulgentias saeculares per singula horarum momenta multiplicas.”
§ 2. proposito: sc. per edictum; cf. Aug. 42, 2, proposito congiario:
Ner. 7, 2, populo congiarium, militi donativum proposuit: Claud. 18, 2,
negotiatoribus certa lucra proposuit.
editurum: see on c. 7, 3.
ut peterent, ultro adhortatus est: Pliny (Pan. 33) says the same
of Trajan's readiness to give spectacles: Impetratum est quod postulabatur;
oblatum quod non postulabatur; institit ultro, et, ut concupisceremus,
admonuit. The adv. ultro meant (1) ‘to the further side" (opp. to citro);
(2) "furthermore”; (3) ‘beyond what could be expected of one,” “of
one's own accord." Gladiators who were kept in reserve and only produced
at the special request of the spectators were called postulaticii (Sen.
Ερ. 7, 4).
armaturae Thraecum: the class of gladiators known as Thraeces were
so called from their small round shields like those of the Thracians (a
similitudine parmularum Thraciarum, Paul. ex Fest. p. 366 M.); cf. parmae
Threcidicae, Plin. N.H. xxxiii 129. They carried a short curved sword
(sica, Suet. Calig. 32; falx supina, Juv. viii 201) and wore greaves (ocreae).
They were usually pitted against murmillones (so called from the image
of a fish mormyr, μορμύρος, on their helmets), who were heavily armed and
carried a big oblong shield (scutum). Caligula fought as a Thraex, and
reduced the amount of armour of the murmillones (Suet. Calig. 54, 55).
On one occasion a murmillo fought him in a sham contest with wooden
swords (rudes) and fell on purpose, whereupon Caligula stabbed him with
a real sica, and ran about with a palm-branch as victors do (ib. 32). The
form Thraex, to denote a gladiator, is attested by the best MSS. and by
inscriptions (see Orelli-Mewes on Hor. S. ii 6, 44, Thraex est Gallina Syro
par?); Thrax meant a Thracian.
=
cum populo cavillatus est: this is rightly explained by Baumg.-Cr.
as cum populo, diversae factioni favente, iocose altercatus est ut fautor
Thraecum. Suetonius always uses cavillatio in the sense of a jest or
witticism; cf. Vesp. 23, 1, ut invidiam aliqua cavillatione dilueret: Tib.
57, 2, acerba cavillatio “a brutal witticism": Gramm. 3, cavillatio nominis
"a pun on a name." For cavillari cum cf. Cic. Att. ii 1, 5, familiariter
cum ipso cavillor ac iocor.
ut fautor: partizanship in the amphitheatre, though not so intense
as in the circus, was very strong among all classes, and some of the
emperors were notorious for it. This partizanship was exhibited not only
towards individual gladiators, but also towards the various kinds of
combatants (Friedl. Sitteng. ii10 75). Caligula and Titus favoured the
Thraeces; Domitian the murmillones (see Dom. 10, 1, and notes there).
Tacitus (H. ii 91) says of Vitellius: omnem infimae plebis rumorem
("applause") in theatro ut spectator, in circo ut fautor adfectavit.
maiestate salva: cf. Tac. A. i 47, maiestate salva, cui maior e longinquo
reverentia. Contrast the undignified conduct of Claudius at the gladiatoria
munera, as described in Claud. 21, 5: Nec ullo spectaculi genere communior aut remissior erat, adeo ut oblatos victoribus aureos ("gold coins")
prolata sinistra pariter cum vulgo voce digitisque numeraret ac saepe
hortando rogandoque ad hilaritatem homines provocaret, "dominos"
identidem appellans, immixtis interdum frigidis et arcessitis (“farfetched'') iocis. Vespasian too was lacking in dignity in his lighter
moments; see Vesp. 22.
aequitate: the same impartiality in observing the leges harenae and
bestowing on the victors the promised rewards, regardless of the class
to which they belonged, is attributed to Trajan by Pliny, Pan. 33, Quam
deinde in edendo (munere gladiatorio) liberalitatem, quam iustitiam exhibuit
omni affectione aut intactus aut maior!
ne quid praetermitteret: cf. Vesp. 8, 3, ne quam occasionem corrigendi disciplinam praetermitteret.
thermis suis: see c. 7, 3.
admissa plebe lavit: an example followed by Alexander Severus; cf.
Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 42, Thermis et suis et veterum frequenter cum populo
usus est, et aestate maxime, balneari veste ad Palatium revertens, hoc
solum imperatorium habens quod lacernam cocceam accipiebat. Einhard
(c. 22) relates the same of Charlemagne: Non solum filios ad balneum,
verum optimates et amicos, aliquando etiam satellitum et custodum corporis
turbam invitavit; ita ut nonnunquam centum vel eo amplius homines
lavarentur.
§ 3. sub eo: "in his reign"; cf. Calig. 21, opera sub Tiberio semiperfecta: Tac. Agr. 6, gnarus sub Nerone temporum: ib. 45, praecipua
sub Domitiano miseriarum pars erat. Such designations of time are post-class. (Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. ii 557).
fortuita: the subst. fortuita (= fortuito accidentia) is used of accidents
of fortune, disasters; cf. Ner. 39, 1, Accesserunt tantis ex principe malis
probrisque quaedam et fortuita: pestilentia unius autumni, etc.; Tac. A. xiv
3, nihil tam capax fortuitorum quam mare.
=
ac: intensive, ac quidem. Kühner-Stegmann, ii 16.
conflagratio Vesuvii: the famous eruption on the 24th of August,
79 A.D., which overwhelmed Herculaneum and Pompeii. It is vividly
described by Pliny in two letters to Tacitus (vi 16 and 20); his uncle,
the elder Pliny, perished in it. See also Dio lxvi 21-23. The earthquake
which accompanied it caused widespread havoc in Campania. The corruptions in the MSS. make it impossible to determine which of the various
forms of the name of the volcano (Vesuvius, Vesevus, Vesaevus, Vesvius,
Vesbius) was used by Suetonius. Here ue*bii is the reading of M, uesubii
of G, ueseui of N; a few lines later M has uesuuio, G uesubio, L uesieuio,
the rest ueseuio or ueseuo. Roth and Preud'homme adopt the form Vesvius,
Ihm Vesuvius.
incendium Romae: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 12, Huius tempore mons
Vesuvius in Campania ardere coepit, incendiumque Romae sine nocturna
requie per triduum fuit. Dio (lxvi 24) mentions that the fire occurred in
80 A.D., while Titus was absent from Rome relieving the distress in
Campania; he also gives a list of the principal buildings which were
destroyed by the fire: πῦρ δὲ δὴ ἕτερον ἐπίγειον τῷ ἑξῆς ἔτει πολλὰ πάνυ τῆς
Ῥώμης, τοῦ Τίτου πρὸς τὸ πάθημα τὸ ἐν τῇ Καμπανίᾳ γενόμενον ἐκδημήσαντος,
ἐπενείματο. καὶ γὰρ τὸ Σεραπεῖον, καὶ τὸ Ἰσεῖον, τά τε Σεπτά, καὶ τὸ Ποσειδώνιον,
τό τε βαλανεῖον τὸ τοῦ ᾿Αγρίππου, καὶ τὸ Πάνθειον, τό τε Διριβιτώριον, καὶ τὸ τοῦ
Βάλβου θέατρον, καὶ τὴν τοῦ Πομπηίου σκηνήν, καὶ τὰ Ὀκταουίεια οἰκήματα μετὰ
τῶν βιβλίων, τόν τε νεὼν τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ Καπιτωλίου μετὰ τῶν συννάων αὐτοῦ
κατέκαυσεν. Of these buildings the Serapeum, Isaeum, Saepta, Templum
Neptuni, Thermae Agrippae, Pantheon, Diribitorium, Theatrum Balbi,
Scaena (Theatrum) Pompeii, and Porticus Octaviae (with the library) were
all situated in the southern part of the Campus Martius, on the north side
of the Capitoline.
pestilentia: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 13, lues quoque, quanta vix unquam
antea fuit. This must be the plague at Rome in which on many days
about 10,000 perished, assigned to the reign of Vespasian in Euseb.-Hieron.
Chron. (ad a. 2093, i.e. 77 A.D.): Lues ingens Romae facta, ita ut per
multos dies in ephemeridem decem milia ferme mortuorum referrentur.
Dio (lxvi 23) says that the ashes from Vesuvius were carried to Rome
(also to Africa, Egypt, and Syria) and overhung the city, obscuring the
sun, and that this was the cause of the pestilence which came later: ἡ μὲν
οὖν τέφρα αὕτη οὐδὲν μέγα τότε κακὸν αὐτοὺς εἰργάσατο, ὕστερον δὲ νόσον σφίσι
λοιμώδη δεινὴν ἐνέβαλε. Plagues raged at Rome and throughout Italy in
23 and 22 B.C. (Dio liii 33, liv 1), and in 65 A.D. during Nero's reign Rome
was devastated by a pestilence, the horrors of which are depicted in Tac.
A. xvi 13; the 30,000 burials recorded in the Temple of Libitina during
that autumn were only a fractional part of the total mortality (Friedlaender, Sitteng. i¹º 31).
non temere: see on c. 6, 2.
talibus: Cornelissen suggested fatalibus.
non modo sed et: this use of sed et for sed etiam is post-class.
(Kühner-Stegmann, ii 59). Suetonius also uses non modo sed etiam;
non modo
verum et; non solum
verum et (or etiam); non tantum
sed et (or etiam); non solum
sed et (or etiam).
affectum: affectus (subst.) in the sense of amor or benevolentia is
post-class. In class. Lat. it denotes any state or disposition of mind (or
body). See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 116.
opitulando quatenus suppeteret facultas: Hadrian acted in a similar
way in the face of like calamities; Spart. Hadr. 21, Fuerunt eius temporibus fames, pestilentia, terrae motus, quae omnia, quantum potuit, procuravit multisque civitatibus vastatis per ista subvenit.
§ 4. curatores restituendae Campaniae: Dio lxvi 24, ὁ δ᾽ οὖν Τίτος τοῖς μὲν
Καμπανοῖς δύο ἄνδρας ἐκ τῶν ὑπατευκότων (consularium) οἰκιστὰς ἔπεμψε, καὶ χρήματα
ἄλλα τε καὶ τὰ τῶν ἄνευ κληρονόμων τεθνηκότων ἐδωρήσατο· αὐτὸς δὲ οὐδὲν οὔτε παρ᾿
ἰδιώτου, οὔτε παρὰ πόλεως, οὔτε παρὰ βασιλέως, καίτοι πολλῶν πολλὰ διδόντων αὐτῷ
καὶ ὑπισχνουμένων, ἔλαβεν· ἀνέστησε μέντοι καὶ ἐκ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων πάντα. The
appointment of these ex-consuls as οἰκισταί, or founders of new settlements,
was a concession on the part of Titus to the senate; see Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 996 n. Titus' restorations are mentioned in an inscription (in
both Gr. and Lat.) at Naples in Campania, date July, 80-June, 81, C.I.L. x
1481, Newton 101: [Αὐτοκράτωρ] Τίτος Καίσαρ θεοῦ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ υἱὸς
Ο]ὐεσπασιανὸς Σεβαστός, [ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, δημαρχ]ικῆς ἐξουσίας τὸ ί, [αὐτοκράτωρ
τὸ ιέ, πατὴρ πατρίδος, ὕπατος τὸ ή, τειμητής, [ἐν Νέᾳ πόλει δημαρχήσας, ἀγων]ο
θετήσας τὸ γ' γυμνασιαρχήσας
[ὑπὸ σεισμῶν συμπεσόντα ἀποκατέστησεν.
[Imp. Titus Caesar divi Vespasia]ni f. Vespasianus Aug., [pont. max.,
trib. pot. x, imp. xv,] cos. viii, censor, p.p.,
[terrae mo]tibus
conlapsa restituit. For Vespasian's restoration of a temple at Herculaneum
which had been wrecked by an earlier earthquake in 62 A.D. see on Vesp. 17.
bona quorum heredes non extabant: these, as bona vacantia, would
escheat to the fiscus.
nihil publice nisi perisse testatus: there is considerable variation
in the MSS. here: nichil nisi sibi perisse testatus publice (r); nichil nisi
sibi publice perisse testatus (OT vulg.); nichil nisi sibi perisse publice
testatus (N); nihil publice perisse testatus (Torrentius, from what he
describes as an "optimus codex," now unknown; Roth and Preud 'homme
adopt this reading). The confusion seems due to a mistaken effort to
connect the words nihil publice with perisse and not with testatus; but
the latter is the right construction, as is shown by Oth. 6, 3: nihil magis
pro contione testatus est, quam id demum se habiturum, quod sibi illi
reliquissent. Possibly se should be inserted after nisi. The only public
pronouncement of Titus was that he was a ruined man, i.e. that he would
be ruined by the cost of the rebuilding which he had at once resolved to
undertake at his own expense. Alexander (op. cit. p. 20) thinks the
original reading was nihil publice nisi sibi perisse testatus which he translates "nothing had perished in a public way save only so far as he was
concerned," the meaning being that Titus would shoulder the whole burden
and that there would be no extra tax-levies on the unfortunate citizens to
restore the ruined edifices. But though either nihil publice perisse or nihil
nisi sibi perisse would be intelligible, nihil publice nisi sibi perisse seems
very improbable.
praetoriorum: praetorium was used in the sense of a country mansion;
see Mayor on Juv. i 75 (criminibus debent hortos praetoria mensas) where
he cites Colum. i 6 to show that the villa in the wider sense, country seat,
was divided into (1) urbana, hall or residence; (2) rustica, farm; (3) fructuaria, stores, barns, etc.; and the urbana as "the headquarters of the
peaceful camp" was named praetorium (Pallad. i 8, 2 etc.). Augustus
disliked palatial country mansions (Aug. 72, 2, ampla et operosa praetoria
gravabatur). Caligula in building praetoria delighted in overcoming
natural obstacles by filling up seas and valleys and cutting away rocks and
mountains (Calig. 37, 2). praetorium has the same sense in Tib. 39;
Stat. S. i 3, 25: Mart. x 79, etc. Suetonius also uses it for the headquarters in a camp (e.g. Vitell. 8, 2) and for the praetorian guard (e.g.
Tit. 6, 1).
medendae valitudini: for the dative of purpose see on Oth. 3, 1. The
acc. with mederi (instead of the usual dat.) is very rare; it occurs once in
Terence (Phorm. 822) and then not till Livy (see the instances collected by
Neue-Wagener, Formenlehre iii 5).
nullam .. opem non adhibuit: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 14, quibus tamen
malis, nullo vexato, pecunia propria subvenit, cunctis remediorum generibus,
nunc aegrotantes per semetipsum reficiens, nunc consolans suorum mortibus
afflictos.
sacrificiorum: the plague was interpreted as a manifestation of divine
wrath for some offence which required to be expiated by the sacrifice of
hostiae piaculares.
§5. adversa: subst. = mala, calamitates; so a few lines earlier, in iis
tot adversis ac talibus.
delatores: this term for “informers” was derived from the giving
in the name (delatio nominis) of an accused person to the presidents of
the quaestiones perpetuae. The rewards to be obtained in some cases,
even under the Republic, from the goods of the condemned led to the
quadruplatores (later delatores) becoming a professional class. Under
the early Empire Tacitus describes delatores as “genus hominum publico
exitio repertum et ne poenis quidem satis coercitum’” (Ann. iv 30). Among
their many activities they denounced to the agents of the imperial Treasury
any possession of property which the Treasury could claim (res fisci).
They profited by the praemia given by Augustus for convictions of
violations of his marriage laws, and especially by the Lex Iulia de
maiestate (lèse-majesté) which gave the accuser + of the estate of the
condemned. Tiberius at first discouraged, but afterwards encouraged them
(Tib. 61: Tac. A. i 73, iv 30). Caligula on his accession “negavit se
delatoribus aures habere" (Calig. 15, 4), and Nero in his early days
reduced their rewards (Ner. 10, 1). Domitian began by repressing them
(Dom. 9, 3), but later used them as tools for his extortions (Dom. 12, 1).
Trajan followed the example of Titus by punishing them severely and
banishing them (Plin. Pan. 34, 44).
mandatores: those who suborn, or furnish materials to, informers
(delatores). The jurist Callistratus (Dig. xlix 14, 2) says that under the
Antonines mandatores were to be punished equally with delatores: Divus
Pius Caecilio Maximo rescripsit constitutionem patris sui, qua compelleretur
delator edere mandatorem ac, nisi edidisset, ut in vincula deduceretur, eo
pertinere, non ut delator poenae subduceretur, si mandatorem haberet, sed
ut mandator quoque perinde atque si ipse detulisset puniretur: cf. xlix 14,
24, non tantum delator punitur, si non probaverit, sed et mandator: quem
exhibere debet delator. There can be no doubt that mandatores is the
right reading in our passage, but Ihm keeps amendatores, the reading of M.
assidue caesos: cf. Mart. vi 46, vapulat assidue veneti quadriga
flagello: Pelagon. 365, assidue aut flagello aut voce excitari debet: Salvian.
de gub. dei i 57, assidue flagellamur: Suet. Calig. 30, 2, equestrem ordinem
assidue proscidit ('tongue-lashed," Rolfe).
..
flagellis ac fustibus: cf. Lamprid. Comm. 18, where the outcries of the
senate against the delatores at the death of Commodus are quoted: “Nunc
securi sumus; delatoribus metum. Ut securi simus, delatoribus metum. Ut
salvi simus, delatores de senatu, delatoribus fustem. Te salvo delatores ad
leonem. Te imperante delatoribus fustem.” "Now at last we are secure;
let informers tremble. That we may be secure, let informers tremble. That
we may be safe, cast informers out of the senate, the club for informers!
While you are safe, to the lions with informers! While you are ruler,
the club for informers!" (Magie). Marcilius points out that slaves were
beaten with flagella, free men with fustes; cf. Macer (Dig. xlviii 19, 10):
Ex quibus causis liber fustibus caeditur, ex his servus flagellis caedi, et
domino reddi iubetur; et ex quibus liber fustibus caesus in opus publicum
damnatur, ex his servus sub poena vinculorum, ad eius temporis spatium,
flagellis caesus domino reddi iubetur. The delatores, as free men about to
be sold as slaves, receive both punishments.
traductos per harenam: Martial (Spect. 4) refers to this: Turba
gravis paci placidaeque inimica quieti, | quae semper miseras sollicitabat
opes, | traducta est, ingens nec cepit harena nocentes: | et delator habet
quod dabat exilium. | Exulat Ausonia profugus delator ab urbe: | haec
licet impensis principis adnumeres. Friedlaender (on Mart. l.c.) suggests
that this exhibition of the delatores took place in the early morning, like
the executions in the amphitheatre before the regular spectacles. traducere
means 'to lead in procession as in a triumph"; e.g. Liv. xxxvi 40, cum
captivis nobilibus equorum quoque captorum gregem traduxit.
subici: sc. hastae or praeconi (sub praeconem and voci praeconis
subicere are also used by Cic.); cf. Aug. 24, 1, ipsum bonaque subiecit
hastae. For subicere used absolutely cf. Calig. 38, 4, reliquias omnium
spectaculorum subiecit et venditavit.
imperavit: Pliny (Pan. 35) mentions the edictum Titi against the
delatores, and says that Nerva made some additions to it, while Trajan
improved it so much that he might be regarded as the originator of it.
Suetonius uses imperare 16 times with the acc. and inf. pass. (in Tib. 57, 2
with the inf. act. and pass., adtractum ad se recipere debitum ducique ad
supplicium imperavit); once with ut (Calig. 46), and once with the
subjunct. without ut (Ner. 1, 1).
in asperrimas insularum: cf. Sen. ad Helv. 6, 4, deserta loca et asperrimas insulas Sciathum et Seriphum, Gyarum et Corsicam percense: nullum
invenies exilium, in quo non aliquis animi causa moretur. For insularum
instead of insulas cf. Liv. x 2, gravissimas navium; xxviii 39, terrarum
ultimas. Banishment to islands was common under the Empire; e.g.
Augustus banished his daughter Julia to Pandataria, off Latium, and later
her son Agrippa to Planasia, off Etruria (Aug. 19:65); Tiberius banished
his daughter-in-law to Pandataria (Tib. 53), and the son of Germanicus
to Pontia, off Latium. The different grades of banishment distinguished
by Callistratus (Dig. xlviii 19, 28) are (1) in insulam deportatio, (2) deportatio, (3) in insulam relegatio, (4) in perpetuum relegatio, (5) in tempus
relegatio. (deportatio involved loss of all civil and personal rights, relegatio
loss of none; Vesp. 15, n.) The miseries of an exile on a barren isle are
illustrated by Seneca's epigrams on his exile in Corsica. An exhaustive
account of such banishment will be found in Mayor's note on Juv. i 73,
aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris (islet in Aegaean) et carcere dignum, | si vis
esse aliquid.
avehi: cf. Iul. 66, vetustissima nave impositos quocumque vento in
quascumque terras iubebo avehi: Ter. Phorm. 977, non hoc publicitus
scelus hinc asportarier | in solas terras! Dio (lxvi 19) merely says that
Titus banished the delatores from Rome: τοὺς μηνυτὰς ἐξήλασεν ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως.
vetuit de eadem re pluribus legibus agi: to prevent the delatores, in
the event of their having unsuccessfully brought a charge under a certain
law, from renewing the charge under some other law. This enactment of
Titus was in accordance with the general principle of Roman civil law
that a matter once tried should not be tried again (except by way of
appeal), even though the form of suit was different. Fresh proceedings
were (with certain exceptions) barred by the Exceptio rei iudicatae; cf.
Ulp. Dig. xliv 2, 7, 4, Exceptio obstat quotiens inter easdem personas eadem
quaestio revocatur vel alio genere iudicii; xliv 2, 5, De eadem re agere
videtur et qui non eadem actione agat, qua ab initio agebat, sed etiam si
alia experiatur, de eadem tamen re. (Roby, Rom. Priv. Law ii 388 sqq.)
statu: the legal position of a person according as he was freeborn
(ingenuus), freedman (libertus), or slave (servus). The delatores would
try to prove that a deceased person had had no right to the status of free-born, and that so his testamentary dispositions were invalid.
ultra certos annos: the number of years is unknown; it may have
been five, the number fixed later by Nerva and Marcus Aurelius; cf.
Callistr. Dig. xl 15, 4, primus omnium divus Nerva edicto vetuit, post quinquennium mortis cuiusque de statu quaeri (the words primus omnium contradict what Suet. says about Titus); Capitol., Marc. Anton. 10, de statu
etiam defunctorum intra quinquennium quaeri iussit. Marcus Aurelius
also ordained that if any one had been formally declared freeborn (ingenuus), no revision of this declaration could be made except during his
lifetime, and that any suit commenced for contesting such a declaration
was at once extinguished by his death. Hadrian decided that the status
of a living person could not be questioned if it would affect that of a
person dead more than five years; cf. Dig. xl 15, 1, where Marcianus
states that at times the five years' limitation was not observed if the
investigation was in favour of, and not prejudicial to, the deceased, e.g.
to show that the mother of a living slave was a freewoman and not an
ancilla. See Roby, op. cit. i 50.
2 к
CHAPTER 9.
pontificatum maximum: the chief pontificate, the highest religious
power, was conferred apart from the other imperial powers on all the
emperors from Augustus to Gratianus, who (c. 382) formally renounced
it, and none of his successors appears as pontiff. It usually comes first in
the order of imperial titles recorded in inscriptions; e.g. C.I.L. ii 4838,
Imp. Tito Caesare Vespasiano Aug., pont. max., trib. pot. IX, imp. XV,
p. p., cos. VIII. It had been conferred on Julius Caesar, and on his
assassination it was usurped by Lepidus, on whose death (13 в.с.), and
not before, Augustus accepted it (Aug. 31, 1). As pontifex maximus the
emperor could deal with all offences against religion. It was in this
capacity that Domitian punished the Vestal virgins charged with incest
(Dom. 8, 3). The office also carried great powers of patronage, and the
emperor by his nomination or commendation could secure admission for
his favourites to the religious colleges. See Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 72,
780, 783, 1106 sqq.; Greenidge, Rom. Public Life p. 351.
puras manus: as the context shows, puras here means free from
bloodguiltiness, a limited meaning which occurs e.g. in Hor. S. i 4, 68, at
bene si quis | et vivat puris manibus (where see Palmer); so καθαραὶ (opp.
to φονίαι) χεῖρες, Aesch. Eum. 313, etc. Bremi refers to the belief that it
was a pollution for a priest even to look upon a corpse.
nec auctor.. necis nec conscius: Dio lxvi 19, οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Τίτος οὐδένα
τῶν βουλευτῶν (senatorum) ἐν τῇ αὑτοῦ ἡγεμονίᾳ ἀπέκτεινεν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἄλλος τις
αὐτῷ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ ἀρχῆς ἐτελεύτησεν: C. 18, ὁ δὲ δὴ Τίτος οὐδὲν φονικὸν . .
μοναρχήσας ἔπραξεν, ἀλλὰ χρηστός, καίπερ ἐπιβουλευθείς, ἐγένετο. Ausonius
(Caes. xi) praises Titus as "expers civilis sanguinis, orbis amor." Cf.
also Oros. vii 9, 13, cuius tanta tranquillitas in imperio fuit, ut nullius
omnino sanguinem in re publica administranda fudisse referatur: Eutrop.
vii 21, 2, Romae tantae civilitatis in imperio fuit, ut nullum omnino puniret,
convictos adversum se coniurationis dimiserit, et in eadem qua antea
familiaritate habuerit. Nerva took an oath in the senate that he would
not slay any senator, and he kept his pledge in spite of plots against him
(Dio lxviii 2).
duos patricii generis, etc.: Aur. Vict. Caes. 10, 3, Neque minus sancte
facilis in tuendis, qui forte in se coniuravissent, adeo ut, cum amplissimi
ordinis duo abnuere cogitatum scelus nequirent patresque censuissent de
confessis supplicium sumendum, deductos in spectaculum se utrimque
adsidere iusserit petitoque ex industria gladiatoris (mirmillonum, Epit. 10,
3), quorum pugnae visebantur, gladio quasi ad explorandam aciem uni
atque alteri committeret. Queis perculsis et constantiam mirantibus:
"videtisne,” inquit, “potestates fato dari frustraque temptari facinus
potiundi spe vel amittendi metu?” Dio (lxviii 3) tells precisely the same
story about Nerva, except that the emperor's daring is made the more
remarkable by the statement that the conspirators, when invited to the
gladiatorial show, had no knowledge that their plot had been detected.
Aelian (Var. Hist. vi 14) describes how Dareius, son of Hystaspes, dealt
in the same bold fashion with Aribazus, when he conspired with others to
slay the Persian king during a hunt.
convictos in: for this constr. cf. Claud. 14, in maiore fraude convictos:
Cic. Sull. 83, in hoc scelere convictus. Suetonius also uses (a) the gen.,
Tib. 1, 2, alter latrocinii, caedis alter convictus est; (b) the abl., Ner. 31, 3,
scelere convictos; (c) the inf., Vesp. 4, 3, convictus ducenta sestertia
expressisse iuveni.
adfectatione imperii: though adfectare in the sense of niti ad, cum
studio expetere occurs from Sallust on, the subst. adfectatio is not found
before Val. Max. In other passages of Suet. it is used for literary
affectation; Tib. 70, 1, adfectatione et morositate nimia obscurabat stilum;
Gramm. 10, 1, nimia priscorum verborum adfectatione.
nihil amplius quam monuit: Julius Caesar had acted in the same
lenient way towards conspirators; cf. Iul. 75, 4, Si qua posthac aut
cogitarentur gravius adversus se aut dicerentur, inhibere maluit quam
vindicare. Itaque et detectas coniurationes conventusque nocturnos non
ultra arguit, quam ut edicto ostenderet esse sibi notas, et acerbe loquentibus
satis habuit pro contione denuntiare ne perseverarent.
For the elliptical
nihil amplius quam see on Dom. 21, nihil aliud quam deambulabat.
•
§ 2. cursores suos: Domitian's couriers are mentioned in Tac. Agr. 43,
supremo quidem die momenta ipsa deficientis (Agricolae) per dispositos
cursores nuntiata constabat.`
non solum sed et: see on c. 8, 3.
..
familiari cenae adhibuit: a special mark of imperial favour; cf.
Ner. 22, 3, Instituerant civitates, apud quas musici agones edi solent,
omnes citharoedorum coronas ad ipsum (Neronem) mittere. Eas adeo grate
recipiebat, ut legatos, qui pertulissent, non modo primos admitteret, sed
etiam familiaribus epulis interponeret.
circa se: see on c. 4, 3; cf. Liv. xlii 52, 5, constitit in tribunali circa
se habens filios duos.
ex industria: "deliberately," Gr. ἐπιτηδές; cf. Vesp. 16, 2: Dom. 16,
2:19. Suetonius also uses the Ciceronian de industria, e.g. Galb. 19, 2.
Livy seems to be the first to use ex.
ferramenta pugnantium inspicienda: ferramenta, which usually means
iron tools, is very rarely used as here in the sense of arma; cf. Cic.
Sull. 19, in munere servili obtulit se ad ferramenta prospicienda; id. Cat. iii
5. At the gladiatorial spectacles, after the opening parade of the gladiators
through the arena, there was often some sham fighting with harmless
weapons (arma lusoria) in which gladiators gave a display of their exercises
and noble amateurs often took part; Dio (lxvi 15) says that Titus defeated
Alienus (prob. the consul in 69) in such sham fighting at games in his
native place Reate. When this terminated, the giver of the spectacle
(editor) was asked to examine the real weapons (arma pugnatoria,
decretoria) about to be used, to see that they conformed with the regulations.
Drusus, son of Tiberius, apparently conducted this probatio armorum with
rigour, and the variety of gladiator's sword with the sharpest edge was
called after him (Δρουσιανὰ ξίφη, Dio lvii 13). Domitian at his spectacles
seems to have deprived the gladiators of defensive armour (see Friedl. on
Mart. viii 80). Marcus Aurelius, when he presided at the shows given in
his name, would only allow the combatants to use blunted swords (gladii
2 к 2
hebetes) or weapons with the point protected by a ball or button (arma
praepilata). See Friedl., Sitteng. ii¹º 73; Daremberg-Saglio, ii 1594.
cognita utriusque genitura: genitura meant (a) the day and hour of
birth, (b) the calculations based upon this by the soothsayers or astrologers
(genethliaci, mathematici, astrologi, Chaldaei, Babylonii) who cast the
horoscopes or nativities predicting the future fate or fortune of the child
from the position of the stars at its birth; cf. Vitell. 3, 2, Vesp. 25. The
Greek word γένεσις was also used in Lat. for a horoscope; e.g. Vesp. 14:
Dom. 10, 3: Juv. xiv 248, nota mathematicis genesis tua. Suetonius
(Aug. 94, 12) tells how Augustus and Agrippa visited a mathematicus,
Theogenes, in Apollonia, who predicted great good fortune for Agrippa.
Augustus at first, fearing a less favourable forecast, would not divulge the
time of his birth (reticere genituram suam perseverabat). At last the
mathematicus prevailed on him to do so, and when he heard it, Theogenes
sprang up and paid homage. Augustus afterwards had such confidence in
his destiny that he published the thema or horoscope, and struck a silver
coin with Capricorn, his natal star, upon it. Later emperors were experts
in astrology; e.g. Tiberius (who foretold the rise of Galba, Galb. 4, 1, n.),
Hadrian, and Septimius Severus (Spartian. Sever. 2, in quadam civitate
Africana, cum sollicitus mathematicum consuluisset positaque hora ingentia
vidisset astrologus, dixit ei “tuam, non alienam, pone genituram’';
cumque Severus iurasset suam esse, omnia ei dixit quae postea facta sunt:
c. 3, cum amissa uxore aliam vellet ducere, genituras sponsarum requirebat,
ipse quoque matheseos peritissimus, et cum audisset esse in Syria quandam
quae id geniturae haberet ut regi iungeretur, eandem uxorem petit).
quandoque: "at some future time," the prevalent meaning of the
word in Suetonius; but he also has it in its other sense of "whenever"
(= quandocumque), e.g. Claud. 1, 4, se rei p. statum, quandoque posset,
restituturum.
§ 3. fratrem insidiari sibi non desinentem: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 11,
fratrem quoque Domitianum parantem insidias, militumque animos sollicitantem flens saepius obtestatus est, ne parricidio assequi cuperet, quod et
se volente esset obventurum ei et iam haberet, cum sit particeps potestatis.
The plotting of Domitian against Titus from the time of Vespasian's
death is described in Dom. 2, 3, neque cessavit ex eo insidias struere fratri
clam palamque. Titus had displayed a spirit of brotherly affection (pietas)
towards Domitian at the beginning of their father's reign by interceding
for him when unfavourable rumours had reached Vespasian about him
(Tac. H. iv 52). A remark which Pliny (Ep. iv 9, 2) makes about Julius
Bassus, "Titum timuit ut Domitiani amicus," suggests that the forbearance of Titus towards his brother was not extended to his brother's
friends.
ex professo : = palam, aperte, "openly and avowedly"; cf. Sen. Ερ. 14,
Macrob. S. ii 9. Apuleius (Apol. 2) uses de professo. The passive sense
of the deponent ptc. professus is first found in Ov. Am. iii 14, 6, solaque
famosam culpa professa facit. See Neue-Wagener, Formenl. iii 43.
Similar adverbial phrases used by Suet. are ex compacto, ex improviso, ex
inopinato, ex composito, ex destinato.
fugam: presumably to join some army in the provinces and lead it
against Titus.
501.
seponere: such "sequestration" was a thinly disguised form of
relegatio (Vesp. 15, n.), as it really banished a person by sending him away
from Rome under some specious pretext; cf. Oth. 3, 2, sepositus est per
causam legationis in Lusitaniam: Aug. 65, 1, Agrippam
Surrentum. Tacitus mentions several instances; e.g. A. iv 44, hunc
seposuit Augustus in civitatem Massiliensem, ubi specie studiorum nomen
exilii tegeretur.
seposuit
On
consortem successoremque: the titles consors imperii (Oth. 8, 1) and
particeps imperii (Tit. 6, 1, Dom. 2, 3) are used indifferently of the
emperor's co-regent by Suet., Tac., and other authors. Under the constitution of the Principate the Princeps was given no right of appointing
a successor, and Augustus had recourse to a consortium imperii, the co-regent being invested with extraordinary tribunician and pro-consular
powers and placed in a position above all other magistrates, second only
to the Princeps. Mommsen compares the relation of the co-regent to the
Princeps with that of the praetor to the consul (Staatsr. ii³ 1146).
the death of the Princeps, the co-regent, though having no legal claim, in
practice succeeded to the vacant throne, unless prevented by revolution.
See also Dom. 15, 1. In spite of the protestations of Titus mentioned
here by Suetonius, he did not in reality associate Domitian in the government of the Empire. Neither the proconsulare imperium nor the tribunicia
potestas was conferred upon him. He did not allow him to have the title
of Imperator (allowed by Vespasian to Titus, see on c. 6, 1); this is
shown by inscriptions in the reign of Titus, e.g. C.I.L. iii 318 (80 A.D.)
where Domitian appears merely as "Caesar, Divi filius, Domitianus, consul
VII, princeps iuventutis."
..
ut mutuo erga se animo vellet esse: for the constr. cf. Tac. H. iv
49, nec ambigitur militem alienato erga Vespasianum animo fuisse; for
the use of mutuus cf. Cic. Fam. v 2, 1, Quod autem ita scribis, “pro
mutuo inter nos animo,” quid tu existimes esse in amicitia “mutuum”
nescio; equidem hoc arbitror, cum par voluntas accipitur et redditur:
Catull. 45, 20, mutuis animis amant amantur: Hor. C. iv 1, 30, Iam nec
spes animi credula mutui, "the fond hope of finding a heart to answer
mine'' (Wickham): Cic. Att. xvi 16 a, tua voluntas erga me meaque erga
te par atque mutua. Modderman, who asserts that mutuus animus erga
aliquem is meaningless, would read mutato.
CHAPTER 10.
morte praeventus est: "he was cut short (taken off) by death";
cf. Iul. 44, 4, talia agentem atque meditantem mors praevenit: Tib. 62, 3,
nisi eum mors praevenisset: Justin 32, 3, peregissetque ultionem, nisi
morte praeventus fuisset. Sallust once (Iug. 71) uses praevenio; it is
not found in Cic. or Caes.
maiore hominum damno quam suo: Titus, like Agricola, was
“felix opportunitate mortis” (Tac. Agr. 45). Ausonius, Caes. xi, addresses
him as "Felix imperio, felix brevitate regendi”; cf. Dio lxvi 18, quoted
on c. 1. For the modal abl. cf. Tib. 41, magno dedecore imperii nec minore
discrimine: Claud. 16, 2, sed suo maiore dedecore. Bagge (De elocutione
Suet., p. 82) says that in these passages the omission of cum is contrary to
the usage of the best prose writers. But in class. Lat., when the modal
abl. has an attribute with it, cum is more frequently omitted, and in Cic.
we find cum sometimes used and sometimes omitted in the same expressions;
e.g. Cat. ii 21, minore dolore perire: Cluent. 30, maximo cum dolore emori:
Rep. 6, 15, celeritate mirabili: N.D. ii 97, cum admirabili celeritate. See
Kühner-Stegmann, i 410.
spectaculis absolutis: the spectacles which Titus gave at the opening
of the new amphitheatre and baths in '80 A.D. (see c. 7, 3) lasted 100 days
(Dio lxvi 25). It was not till the summer of 81 that he went to the Sabine
territory and died there, so that Suetonius is inaccurate in his statement
here. Titus was present at the meeting of the Collegium of the Fratres
Arvales on May 19, 81 A.D. (C.I.L. vi 2060, Newton 1'60).
populo coram: see on Dom. 23, 1.
fleverat: Dio lxvi 26, διατελέσας δὲ ταῦτα, καὶ τῇ γε τελευταίᾳ ἡμέρᾳ καταδακρύσας, ὥστε πάντα τὸν δῆμον ἰδεῖν, οὐδὲν ἔτι μέγα ἔπραξεν, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἐπιγιγνομένῳ
ἔτει . . καθιερώσας ὅσα εἴρηται, μετήλλαξεν (excessit, obiit) ἐν τοῖς ὕδασιν ἐν οἷς καὶ
ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ. The ὕδατα mentioned by Dio as the scene of the deaths
of Vespasian and Titus are the medicinal springs of Cutiliae near Reate;
see Vesp. 24.
Sabinos: his Sabine property at Reate (Vesp. 1, 2). For Sabini in
the sense of a Sabine estate cf. Hor. C. ii 18, 14, satis beatus unicis Sabinis,
the property in a district being described by the name of the people in
the district (see Page on Hor. l.c.; Mayor on Plin. Ep. iii 4).
petit: = petiit, cf. Oth. 7, 1.
tristior, quod hostia aufugerat: for the indicative see on Vitell. 14,
4, exacerbatus, quod propositus est.
The escape of a victim about to be
sacrificed was always a dirum omen.
The victim which broke away was
called effugia, and the auspices at which the mischance occurred were
called piacularia auspicia as requiring expiatory offerings; cf. Festus
p. 245, Piacularia appellantur auspicia cum aut hostia ab ara fugit, aut
percussa mugitum dedit, aut in aliam quam oportuit partem corporis cecidit.
Escapes of victims from the altar are mentioned in Iul. 59; Galb. 18, 1;
Тас. Н. iii 56; Liv. xxi 63; Verg. A. ii 223; Luc. vii 165; Sil. Ital. v 63,
xvi 264.
..
tempestate serena tonuerat: cf. Verg. G. i 487 (describing the portents
of Caesar's death), non alias caelo ceciderunt plura sereno | fulgura. Often
we find this regarded as a favourable sign; e.g. Ennius Ann. 155, сит
tonuit laevum bene tempestate serena: Xen. Hell. vii 1, 31, ἐξ αἰθρίας
ἀστραπάς τε καὶ βροντὰς λέγουσιν αἰσίους αὐτῷ φανῆναι : Hom. Od. xx 112 sqq.;
Ov. F. iii 370. Horace (C. i 34) professes that he was converted from
atheism by this phenomenon.
primam statim: cf. Claud. 39, 1, postero statim die "on the very next
day'": Ner. 6, 2, primo statim conatu. Similarly statim is joined with
the participle and not with the principal verb, in order to fix more closely
the time-relation; e.g. Liv. xxviii 7, 9, quod viso statim hoste in deditionem
concessissent: Suet. Aug. 28, 1, de reddenda re p. bis cogitavit: primum
post oppressum statim Antonium, etc. Kühner-Stegmann, i 789.
mansionem: manere is often used in the sense of pernoctare, and in
post-class. authors mansio (μονή) means "night-quarters" (statio nocturna,
σταθμός); distance was measured by mansiones, stations, day's journeys,
e.g. Plin. N.H. xii 52, a quo (monte) octo mansionibus distat regio.
febrim nanctus: for this very rare use of nancisci cf. Nep. Att. 21,
nactus est morbum: [Suet.] vit. Verg. 35, languorem nactus est.
pallulis: pallula, which in Plautus is used for a small cloak, here
means a curtain, a sense which is attested for palla (Sen. Ira 3, 22, 2, сит
inter dicentes et audientem palla interesset: Gloss. Philox. παραπέτασμα,
velum, palla). Of the many variants in the MSS. (paludamentis, pellibus,
palliolis, plagulis, etc.) plagulis is read in most of the old editions, plagula
being used for the hanging or coverlet of a lectus (Liv. xxxix 6, 7; Non.
86, 7;378; 537, 20). The lectica was roofed with an arch (arcus) of
leather (pellis) and there were horizontal curtain-rods from which the
curtains (vela, pallulae, plagulae) fell; cf. Mart. xi 98, 11, lectica nec te
tuta pella veloque | nec vindicavit sella saepius clausa. A newer variety
of lectica had windows made of lapis specularis (talc?) which opened or
shut (Juv. iv 21, cf. iii 242). See Daremberg-Saglio, iii 1005; Marquardt,
Privatl.2 738.
..
excepto uno: Dio lxvi 26, ὁ δ' οὖν Τίτος ἀποψύχων εἶπε μὲν ὅτι “Εν μόνον
ἐπλημμέλησα. τί δὲ δὴ τοῦτο εἴη οὐ διεσάφησεν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἄλλος οὐδεὶς ἀκριβῶς
ἀνέγνω· οἱ μὲν γὰρ τό, οἱ δὲ τὸ κατείκασαν. Dio says that the prevalent opinion
was that Titus' one regret was having had intercourse with Domitian's
wife, but he himself inclines to the view that the regret was for not
having put Domitian to death for plotting against him, his forbearance
exposing the Empire to such a successor. Ausonius (Caes. xi) refuses to
believe Titus guilty of any offence: Unum dixisti moriens te crimen
habere: | sed nulli de te, non tibi credidimus ("but we believe none
speaking thus of thee not even thee thyself'"). Duruy (Hist. des Romains
iv 674) suggests that the unum factum paenitendum was the putting to
death of Caecina without trial (Tit. 6, 2); and other equally improbable
conjectures have been hazarded. See Henderson, Five Roman Emperors
p. 10.
§ 2. consuetudinem: see on Oth. 2, 2.
habuerit: an example of the fondness of Suetonius for the perf.
subj. instead of the normal pluperf. or imperf. See App. i. § 9. с.
persancte iurabat: cf. Ner. 35, 5, persancte iurasset: Ter. Нес. 771,
deierat persancte. Suetonius also uses perindigne, perraro, persaepe.
Domitia: see Dom. 3, 1.
haud negatura, si qua
fuisset: cf. Iul. 30, 1, bello vindicaturus, si
quid gravius a senatu constitutum esset. This use of the fut. participle
as apodosis to express the inference from a hypothetical proposition is first
found in Livy (e.g. iii 60, egreditur castris Romanus, vallum invasurus, ni
copia pugnae fieret) and occurs frequently in later writers (e.g. Tac. A. i
36, si omitteretur ripa, invasurus hostis). See Draeger, Hist. Synt. ii² 754.
CHAPTER 11.
excessit: there are many conflicting accounts of the cause of Titus'
death. Dio (lxvi 26) says that rumour (ἡ φήμη) attributed it to Domitian,
who plunged him into a vessel full of snow while he was still breathing
(cf. Cedren. p. 179), but that some writers stated that he died of disease.
Suetonius (Dom. 2, 3) says that Domitian ordered the attendants of Titus
to abandon him before he was dead. Aur. Vict. (Caes. 10, 11) declares
that Domitian poisoned him, but in Epit. 10, 15 we are told that he died
of fever. Plutarch (de Sanitate 3) cites Titus as an example of the fatal
use of the bath in sickness, and mentions that this was the view of those
who had tended him. Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vi 32) says that Domitian
poisoned him with a poisonous fish called λαγῶς θαλάσσιος (lepus marinus);
so too Tzetzes (Chil. vi 278): Τίτος δὲ θνῄσκει βεβρωκὼς λαγῶν τῶν θαλασσίων.
Suidas (s.v. Δομετιανός) repeats the poisoning charge; cf. Herodian iv 5, 6.
The Jews believed that Titus' early death was a vengeance from Heaven
for the sacking of Jerusalem; cf. the fantastic account in the Jewish
Talmud which is thus given by Duruy: “Les Juifs en savaient bien plus
long sur cette mort prématurée, et le Talmud raconte encore que Titus,
retournant en Italie avec les vases sacrés ravis par lui dans le temple de
Jéhovah, fut assailli par une furieuse tempête: 'Le Dieu des Juifs, s'écriat-il, n'a donc de force que sur la mer où il a déjà englouti Pharaon. S'il
est vraiment Dieu, qu'il me combatte sur terre.'
A ces mots une voix
répondit: 'Méchant, fils de méchant, J'ai donné la vie à une créature
infiniment petite, c'est elle qui combattra pour moi. '
Dès que Titus eut
touché le rivage d'Italie, un moucheron entra dans ses narines et monta
dans son cerveau qu'il rongea durant sept années. Un jour que le prince
passait devant la boutique d'un forgeron, le bruit du marteau sur l'enclume
arrêta l'insecte et l'atroce souffrance. Titus alors donna quatre pièces
d'argent par jour à un homme qui se tint près de lui en frappant incessamment sur une enclume. Pendant un mois, le moyen réussit; mais au bout
de ce temps l'insecte, accoutumé au bruit, se rémit à ronger. Quand Titus
mourut, on ouvrit son crâne et on y trouva un moucheron gros comme une
hirondelle, armé d'ongles de fer et d'un bec d'airain” (Hist. des Romains,
iv 676 sq.).
in eadem qua pater villa: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 10, 15, in eodem, quo
pater, apud Sabinos agro febri interiit: Oros. vii 9, 14, in eadem villa,
qua pater eius, morbo absumptus est: Euseb.-Hieron. ad a. 2096 (81 A.D.),
Titus morbo periit in ea villa, qua pater eius, anno aetatis xlii: Eutrop. vii
22, morbo periit in ea, qua pater, villa. This villa was at Aquae Cutiliae,
a pagus in the ager Reatinus (see Vesp. 24). The omission of the prep.
with the rel. is regular where the same verb is either repeated or understood in the rel. clause; e.g. Cic. Tusc. i 94, in eadem brevitate, qua illae
bestiolae, reperiemur: id. Legg. iii 33, in ista sum scientia, qua te fuisse
semper scio.
...
..
post biennium patri: Titus died on Sept. 13, 81 A.D.; his reign
began on June 24, 79 A.D., the day after Vespasian's death (Vesp. 24).
Dio (lxvi 26) agrees with Suetonius that Titus reigned for 2 yrs. 2 m. 20 d.
Eutropius (vii 22) inaccurately says 2 yrs. 8 m. 20 d.; Joh. Antioch.
(Müller, Fr. Hist. Gr. iv 579) 2 yrs. 8 m.; Aur. Vict. Caes. 10, 5, biennio
post, ac menses fere novėm interiit, but [Aur. Vict.] Epit. xi, imperavit
annos duos, et menses duos, diesque viginti. Ausonius (258, 11) is writing
with poetic freedom when he says "Ter, dominante Tito, cingit nova laurea
Ianum” (referring to the custom of the new consul putting a fresh wreath
on the statue of Janus on January 1).
altero et quadragesimo aetatis anno: Dio (l.c.), Euseb.-Hieron., and
Eutrop, agree with Suetonius that Titus died in his 42nd year; but the
statement does not tally with the date of the birth of Titus given by
Suetonius (c. 1), viz. Dec. 30, 41 A.D., for if that date were correct, he
would only have been in his 40th year as Aur. Vict. says, Caes. 10, 5, anno
aevi quadragesimo interiit (but Epit. 10, 1, vixit annos quadraginta
unum). That he was born in 39, and not in 41, is shown by Dio (lxvi 18)
who gives his age at his accession as 39 yrs. 5 m. 25 d. (see on c. 1).
Similar inconsistencies on the part of Suetonius occur with regard to Galba
(see on Galb. 23), Otho (Oth. 11), and Vitellius (Vitell. 18). Other examples
of his chronological carelessness are: (a) in Ner. 7 he says that Nero was
in his eleventh year when he was adopted by Claudius, whereas we know
from Tac. A. xii 25 that the adoption took place in 50 A.D., while Nero
was born on Dec. 15, 37 A.D. (Ner. 6); (b) in Claud. 27 he says that
Britannicus was born on the 20th day of the reign of Claudius and in
his second consulship, whereas Claudius began to reign on Jan. 25, 41 A.D.
(Claud. 10), and his second consulship did not begin till 42 (Nipperdey
and Smilda would delete inque secundo consulatu).
non secus atque in domestico luctu maerentibus: Eutrop. vii 22,
tantus luctus eo mortuo publicus fuit, ut omnes tamquam in propria
doluerint orbitate: Aur. Vict. Caes. 10, 6, huius sane mors adeo provinciis
luctui fuit, uti orbatum orbem deflerent: Epit. 10, 16, huius mors vix
credi potest quantum luctus urbi provinciisque intulerit, adeo ut eum
delicias publicas, sicut diximus, appellantes, quasi perpetuo custode orbatum
terrarum orbem deflerent: Oros. vii 9, 14, cum ingenti omnium luctu
morbo absumptus est. The sorrow of the people for the death of Titus
has an earlier parallel in that for the death of Germanicus; cf. Tac. A. ii
82, where, after describing the indignation of the people at Tiberius'
treatment of Germanicus, Tacitus says: Hos vulgi sermones audita mors
(Germanici) adeo incendit ut ante edictum magistratuum, ante senatus consultum, sumpto iustitio desererentur fora, clauderentur domus. Passim
silentia et gemitus, nihil compositum in ostentationem; et quamquam neque
insignibus lugentium abstinerent, altius animis maerebant.
senatus prius quam edicto convocaretur: the usual method of convening (vocare, convocare, cogere) the senate was by edict; cf. Iul. 80, 4,
senatus Id. Mart. in Pompei curiam edictus est: Gell. N.A. iii 18, 7, (edicti)
quo nunc quoque consules, cum senatores in curiam vocant, servandae consuetudinis causa tralaticio utuntur, verba
haec sunt: "Senatores
quibusque in senatu sententiam dicere licet”: Liv. xxiii 32, 3;
xxviii 9, 5; Cic. Fam. xi 6, 2, cum tribuni pl. edixissent, senatus adesset
a. d. xiii Kal. Ian. In cases of emergency the senators were summoned by
criers (per praecones) sent round to their houses. See Mommsen, Staatsr.
iii³ 918.
ad curiam concurrit: the same account is given in Eutrop. vii 22,
senatus, obitu ipsius circa vesperam nuntiato, nocte inrupit in curiam et
tantas ei mortuo laudes gratiasque congessit, quantas nec vivo umquam
egerat nec praesenti. Contrast the wild joy of the senate at the death of
Domitian (Dom. 23, 1). Some MSS. (QSN) have the reading cucurrit,
which appears in various early editions.
obseratisque adhuc foribus: because, as Eutropius (l.c.) tells us, it
was nighttime. I adopt the punctuation advocated by Casaubon and
Baumgarten-Crusius, connecting obseratis foribus with what precedes.
tantas gratias egit laudesque congessit, quantas: in the Editio
Veneta of 1471 and other early editions we find gratias egit laudesque,
quantas congessit, which is supported by Gronovius (on Liv. xxvi 48, dis
immortalibus laudes gratesque egit) who cites Liv. vii 36, dis laudes
gratesque agunt: xxvii 13, dis immortalibus, ut in tali re, laudes gratesque
ago; Plaut. Trin. 821, Neptuno laetus lubens laudes ago et grates, gratiasque habeo. The MSS. of Suetonius are decisively against this reading.
CHAPTER 1.
Domitianus: a cognomen derived from his mother Flavia Domitilla,
who died before his father Vespasian became emperor; cf. Vesp. 3.
Similarly Vespasian derived his cognomen from his mother Vespasia Polla.
natus est: on Oct. 24, 51 A.D., his father being consul for the last
two months of that year (Vesp. 4, 2). His birthday is mentioned C.I.L. x
444, ίχ. Κ. Novembr. natal. Domitiani Aug. n(ostri).
regione urbis sexta: Servius Tullius divided the city within his walls
into 4 regiones: the Suburan, the Esquiline, the Viminal or Colline, and
the Palatine (Varro L.L. v 41 sqq.; Dion. Hal. iv 14). Augustus was
born regione Palati (Aug. 5). The city, within and without the Servian
walls, was divided by Augustus in 7 B.C. into 14 regiones and 265 vici or
parishes (Aug. 30; Plin. N.H. iii 66). The names of these regiones are
unknown; they may have been distinguished merely by numbers. At the
beginning of the 4th cent. the names of the 14 regiones were: I Porta
Capena, II Coelimontium, III Isis et Serapis, Iv Templum Pacis, v Esquiliae,
VI Alta Semita, VII Via Lata, VIII Forum Romanum, Ix Circus Flaminius,
x Palatium, XI Circus Maximus, XII Piscina Publica, XIII Aventinus,
XIV Transtiberim. The "Alta Semita," from which the sexta regio took
its name, ran all along the back of the Quirinal, on the line of the mod.
Strada di Porta Pia.
ad Malum Punicum: this "Pomegranate street" was on the line of
the mod. Via delle Quatro Fontane; see Jordan-Huelsen Topogr. Rom i 3,
426, with the plan (no. vii) of the Quirinal. It probably got its name from
a tree that grew there; cf. Mart. i 117, 6, where the poet mentions his
lodgings on the Quirinal in the street of the Pear-tree (ad Pirum).
Augustus was born in the street of the Ox-Heads (ad Capita Bubula),
which led from the valley of the Colosseum up the slope of the Palatine
(Aug. 5). A house could be designated in the same way; e.g. the villa of
Livia was known as ad Gallinas (Galb. 1); so too a vicus; e.g. that at the
Porta Collina was called ad tres Fortunas from three temples of Fortune
there. The pomegranate (malum Punicum) was introduced into Italy from
the north of Africa; cf. Plin. N.H. xiii 112, Africa circa Carthaginem
Punicum malum cognomine sibi vindicat; aliqui granatum appellant:
Colum. xii 42, mala granata (i.e. with many seeds, grana), quae Punica
vocantur: Mart. xiii 42, 43.
..
domo convertit: cf. Mart. ix 20, 1, Haec, quae tota patet tegiturque
et marmore et auro, | infantis domini (i.e. Domitian) conscia terra fuit.
templum gentis Flaviae: see c. 5. Besides this temple on the Quirinal,
Domitian also built temples to Divus Titus and Divus Vespasianus between
the Clivus Capitolinus and the Capitol. These temples are much praised
by Martial; e.g. ix 1, 8, Manebit altum Flaviae decus gentis | cum sole et
astris cumque luce Romana. | Invicta quidquid condidit manus, caeli est:
ix 34, Iuppiter Idaei risit mendacia busti | dum videt Augusti Flavia templa
poli; cf. Stat. S. v 1, 240, aeternae modo qui sacraria genti | condidit
inque alio posuit sua sidera caelo. In the dedication to Vespasian of his
Argonautica Valerius Flaccus (i 15) says of Domitian: Ille tibi cultusque
deum delubraque genti | instituet, cum iam genitor lucebis ab omni |
parte poli. Domitian intended the templum gentis Flaviae to be a tomb
for members of his house. The ashes of Vespasian were brought thither
from the Mausoleum Augusti (see on Vesp. 23, 4), and there too were
placed the ashes of Titus and his daughter Julia (see Dom. 17, 3), and
finally those of Domitian himself. This temple was in existence in the
4th cent., but no traces of it remain (Jordan-Huelsen, p. 426).
pubertatis: Macrob. Sat. vii 7, 4, secundum iura publica duodecimus
annus in femina et quartus decimus in puero definit pubertatis aetatem.
adulescentiae: defined by Varro (ap. Censor. 14) as from 15 to 30 yrs.
of age; by Isidorus (Orig. xi 2, 4) as from 14 to 28.
infamia: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 11, Domitianus maculosae adulescentiae.
tempus gessisse: this use of gerere for agere is very rare; cf. Sulpic.
ap. Cic. Fam. iv. 5, ut cum aliquo adulescente primario coniuncta aetatem
gereret: Petron. Satyr. 63, vitam Chiam gessi: Val. Flacc. vi 693, semivir
impubemque gerens sterilemque iuventam: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 44, annos
gerens proxime quadraginta. Casaubon would read egisse. In Vesp. 24,
annum agens aetatis sexagesimum, there is a variant gerens.
ut nullum argenteum vas
haberet: during Domitian's riper boyhood and early youth his father Vespasian, after his proconsulship in Africa,
was in very straitened circumstances and was compelled to mortgage all
his property (see Vesp. 4, 3). Even in the families of the poorer classes
it was usual to have the salinum and patera of silver, as these were used
in sacrifices to the household gods. From the middle of the 3rd cent. B.C.
the use of silver in wealthy houses became more and more widespread, not
merely for ordinary table service (argentum escarium, potorium) but also
for display on the abacus. The argentea vasa in a big house are referred
to in Plaut. Aul. 341, hic autem apud nos magna turba ac familia est, |
supellex, aurum, vestis, vasa argentea. See Marquardt, Privatl.2 318 sq.
constat: Burman, Oudendorp, and others prefer constet, the conjecture
of Lipsius, connecting it with ut in the preceding sentence, on the ground
that an example of Domitian's infamia is required as well as of his inopia.
With constat, the example of infamia is given in the form of a separate
statement, independent of the ut clause. Wolf's reasonable objection to
constet is that it attributes to Suet. such a clumsy expression as “Fertur
aetatem gessisse tanta infamia, ut satis constet,” when he could easily
have written “Clodiusque conservarit, etc."
Clodium Pollionem: not mentioned elsewhere.
poema Neronis "Luscio'": Nero's poetical productions included
lyrics, tragic monodies, an epic entitled "Troica," poems (probably elegiac)
on amatory subjects (cf. Mart. ix 26, 9, Nero lascivum iuvenis cum
a
tibi lusit opus: Plin. Ep. v 3), and lampoons, of which the “Luscio”
would be one, others being referred to in Suet. Ner. 24, quamvis id ipsum
in rege Mithridate carmine quodam suo reprehendisset: Tac. A. xv 49,
Quintianus mollitia corporis infamis et
Nerone probroso carmine
diffamatus. "Luscio," which does not occur elsewhere, is presumably
connected with luscus (“one-eyed''), and Casaubon suggested that there
may be a reference to the "Luscio” in Pers. i 128, lusco qui possit dicere
"lusce," as that Satire of Persius is (in his opinion) full of attacks on
Nero and his poems. Juvenal is probably hitting at Nero's pretensions
as a satirist in iv 106, improbior saturam scribente cinaedo. The originality
of Nero's poetry is denied by Tacitus (A. xiv 16), and defended by
Suetonius (Ner. 52) on the ground that he had seen the rough drafts and
corrections in Nero's own handwriting. See Friedl., Sitteng. ii¹º 218 sq.;
Ribbeck, Gesch. röm. Dichtung iii 44 sqq.
chirographum: see on Tit. 3, 2.
Nerva: Marcus Cocceius Nerva, emperor from 96 to 98 A.D. He was
consul with Vespasian in 71, and with Domitian in 90. There does not
seem to be any evidence in support of the charge against him mentioned
here.
§ 2. confugit in Capitolium: he was not with Flavius Sabinus (elder
brother of Vespasian, Vesp. 1, 3) when he occupied the Capitol against
the Vitellians (Vitell. 15, 3), but under cover of darkness Sabinus succeeded
in bringing in Domitian along with his own children; cf. Tac. H. iii 69,
Sabinus arcem Capitolii insedit Vitellianus miles socordi custodia
clausos circumdedit; eoque concubia nocte suos liberos Sabinus et
Domitianum fratris filium in Capitolium accivit. Martial (ix 101, 13)
speaks flatteringly of Domitian as having played a leading part in the
conflict: Adseruit possessa malis Palatia regnis, | prima suo gessit pro
Iove bella puer; cf. Stat. Th. i 21, Defensa prius vix pubescentibus annis |
bella Iovis: id. Silv. i 1, 79: Sil. Ital. Pun. iii 609, Nec te terruerint
Tarpeii culminis ignes, etc.
parte praesentium copiarum: i.e. part of the miles urbanus (the 4 city
cohorts) and the vigiles who had flocked to the house of Sabinus (who was
praefectus urbis); Tac. iii 69, primores senatus plerique equestris ordinis
omnisque miles urbanus et vigiles domum Flavii Sabini complevere. It
was thus a medley of senators, knights, and soldiers who occupied the
Capitol along with Sabinus.
ardente templo: for the burning of the temple of Jupiter Opt. Max.
on the Capitol see Vitell. 15, 3.
apud aedituum clam pernoctavit: Tac. iii 74, Domitianus prima inruptione apud aedituum occultatus. When his father Vespasian was established as emperor, Domitian pulled down the chamber of the aedituus and
built a small shrine to Jupiter Conservator, with an altar on which his own
adventures were represented in marble. At a later period he built a
temple on the Capitol to Jupiter Custos (Dom. 5). Piso, the adopted son
of Galba (Galb. 17), had previously found temporary shelter from the
soldiers of Otho in the chamber of an aedituus of the temple of Vesta
(Tac. i 43). The aedituus or temple-guardian" (also called aeditumus,
Varr. R.R. i 2; aedituens Lucr. vi 1273; Gr. ἱεροφύλαξ) dwelt either in
the temple or close to it. Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 214 sqq., divides aeditui
into aeditui magistri who had charge of the buildings, treasures, records,
etc., and aeditui ministri who kept the temple clean, showed visitors round,
etc.
Isiaci celatus habitu: at the ingenious suggestion of a freedman,
according to Tac. iii 74: sollertia liberti lineo amictu turbae sacricolarum
inmixtus ignoratusque. A similar disguise was used by the proscribed
aedile Volusius in 43 B.C.; cf. App. Bell. Civ. iv 47, Οὐολούσιος δὲ ἀγορανομῶν
προεγράφη, καὶ φίλον ὀργιαστὴν τῆς Ἴσιδος ἔχων ᾔτησε τὴν στολήν, καὶ τὰς ὀθόνας
ἐνέδυ τὰς ποδήρεις καὶ τὴν τοῦ κυνὸς κεφαλὴν ἐπέθετο καὶ διῆλθεν οὕτως ὀργιάζων
αὐτῷ σχήματι ἐς Πομπήιον: Val. Max. vii 3, 8. The Isiaci, priests and
worshippers of Isis, wore linen garments (ὀθόναι); cf. Oth. 12, 1, traditur
(Otho) sacra Isidis saepe in lintea religiosaque veste propalam celebrasse.
The epithet liniger is often applied to the goddess and her devotees (Ov.
Am. ii 2, 25; Met. i 747, etc.: Juv. vi 533: Mart. xii 29, 19). The Isiac
worship was introduced at Rome about the time of Sulla, and survived
repeated attempts of the government to suppress it. Augustus would only
tolerate it outside the city walls. In 19 A.D. Tiberius, in consequence of a
flagrant scandal, ordered the priests of Isis to be crucified and her image
to be thrown into the Tiber. Now, in 69 A.D., we find an Iseum or temple
of Isis on the Capitol, though in 58 B.C. and three times shortly afterwards
her temple there was wrecked by the consuls. The first state temple to
Isis was built in the Campus Martius; the date is uncertain, but it is first
mentioned in connexion with the triumph of Vespasian and Titus in 71 A.D.
See Wissowa, Religion der Römer2 351 sqq.
sacrificulos: Tacitus calls them sacricolae. The word sacrificulus:
"sacrificer'" (only here in Suet.) may be used in the same contemptuous
sense as it bears at times in Livy where it is joined with vates in describing
the false priests and soothsayers who brought in foreign superstitious rites
at Rome (especially in periods of national danger), in opposition to the
regular priests and augurs of the Roman state religion; see Weissenborn.
on Liv. xxv 1, 8, sacrificuli ac vates ceperant hominum mentes: xxxix 16, 8,
quotiens hoc patrum avorumque aetate negotium est magistratibus datum,
uti sacra externa fieri vetarent, sacrificulos vatesque foro circo urbe prohiberent.
variae superstitionis: vanae, the reading of some of the later MSS.,
is generally adopted in the old editions; also by Roth and Preud'homme,
but not by Ihm. variae may mean "shifting" "fickle," or "complex”
"many-sided" as Turnebus explained it: "varia esse potuit illa religio,
variusque cultus et caerimonia, variique cultores, unde et facilior Domitiano
latebra." See also Alexander (op. cit., 21 sqq.). Iac. Gronovius ingeniously
suggested Phariae (i.e. Egyptian), but all the examples quoted of the use
of that epithet are from poetry.
trans Tiberim: Tacitus differs in saying (iii 74) that it was close to
the Velabrum (on the near side of the river) that he found refuge in the
house of Cornelius Primus, a client of his father.
comite uno: his cousin Sabinus, son of Flavius Sabinus (Dio lxiv 17).
For the sociative abl. without the normal cum (Kühner-Stegmann, i 407)
cf. Aug. 8, paucissimis comitibus subsecutus.
§ 3. Caesar consalutatus: Tac. iii 86, Domitianum, postquam nihil
hostile metuebatur, ad duces partium progressum et Caesarem consalutatum
miles frequens, utque erat in armis, in paternos penates deduxit: Dio lxvi 1,
Καίσαρες ὅ τε Τίτος καὶ ὁ Δομιτιανὸς ἐπεδείχθησαν. Claudius was the first to
assume the cognomen “Caesar" as an imperial title (see on Galb. 1), and
this was continued by each successive dynasty, Vitellius alone refusing to
be thus styled (Vitell. 8, 2). The title “Caesar'" was borne not merely
by the founders of these dynasties, but also by their agnate descendants,
and was distinctively used of the sons and grandsons of the reigning
emperor. When Hadrian made his adoptive son Verus assume the name
of Caesar, he gave to "Caesar" the limited meaning of the prospective
"Augustus" or emperor, and “Caesar" continued to be used as the title
of the designated successor to the throne. See Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³
770 sq.
praeturae urbanae consulari potestate: Tac. iv 3, ipsi (Vespasiano)
consulatus cum Tito filio, praetura Domitiano et consulare imperium decernuntur. Domitian succeeded Frontinus as praetor: iv 39, et mox eiurante
("resigning") Frontino Domitianus praeturam cepit. He was given the
consulare imperium (Suetonius loosely says cons. potestas) in the absence
from Rome of the two consuls, his father in Egypt and his brother in
Palestine. It was quite unprecedented for a praetor urbanus to receive
the consulare imperium; see Mommsen, ii³ 650, on the combination of the
consulare imperium with the praetorship and propraetorship.
titulo tenus: “in name only," discharging none of the judicial duties
appertaining to the office; cf. Dom. 13, 3, consulatus .. paene titulo tenus
gessit: Iul. 76, 2, tertium et quartum consulatum titulo tenus gessit contentus dictaturae potestate: Claud. 25, 1, instituit imaginariae militiae
genus quo absentes et titulo tenus fungerentur. Similar phrases are
verbo tenus (Cic. Liv. Tac.), nomine tenus (Tac.), ore tenus (e.g. Tac. A. xv
45, Graeca doctrina ore tenus exercitus).
collegam proximum: presumably the praetor peregrinus, who ranked
next to the praetor urbanus in the exercise of urbana iurisdictio. The
name of the praetor peregrinus in 70 A.D. is unknown. Baumg.-Crusius
and Bremi say that it was Mucianus, but he was consul suffectus (for the
second time) in that year.
vim dominationis licenter exercuit: cf. Tac. H. iv 2, nomen sedemque
(i.e. the palace) Caesaris Domitianus acceperat, nondum ad curas intentus,
sed stupris et adulteriis filium principis agebat (i.e. played the part of
emperor's son): Tac. Agr. 7, iuvene admodum (18 yrs. old) Domitiano et
ex paterna fortuna tantum licentiam usurpante.
ne exequar singula: cf. Calig. 37, 3, ne singula enumerem: Claud. 29,
1, ne singillatim minora quoque enumerem: Galb. 3, 1, elogia universi
generis exequi longum est: Liv. xxvii 27, multos circa unam rem ambitus
fecerim, si . omnia exequi velim.
contrectatis uxoribus: contrectare, to stroke or caress, was used in
the further sense of violare (Plaut., Tac., etc.; contrectatio, Cic.); so
adtrectare, e.g. Ner. 26, 2, a quodam laticlavio, cuius uxorem adtrectaverat,
prope ad necem caesus. Here M has contract- (so Ihm and Preud 'homme),
but contrect- in Calig. 42; Claud. 35, 2; Ner. 34, 4.
Domitiam Longinam: daughter of Domitius Corbulo, the famous
general of Claudius and Nero. On the arrival of Vespasian from Egypt,
Domitian kept her among his mistresses on his estate near the Alban Mount
and afterwards married her; cf. Dio lxvi 3, ὁ δὲ Δομιτιανὸς ... τῷ ἔρωτι τῆς
Δομιτίας τῆς Κορβούλωνος θυγατρὸς προσέχων ἐτύγχανε· ταύτην γὰρ Λουκίου
Λαμίου Αἰλιανοῦ (Αἰμιλιανοῦ codd.) τοῦ ταύτης ἀνδρὸς ἀποσπάσας τότε μὲν ἐν ταῖς
ἐρωμέναις ἐποιήσατο, ὕστερον δὲ καὶ ἔγημεν. Her subsequent history is narrated
in Dom. 3, 1. See also Tit. 10, 2.
Aelio Lamiae: his full name was L. Aelius Plautius Lamia Aelianus
(C.I.L. vi 2059; iii p. 854). In 80 A.D., under Titus, he was consul
suffectus. He was put to death by Domitian for a jesting reference to
the emperor's abduction of his wife; see c. 10, 2. The Lamiae were the
oldest and most illustrious family of the gens Aelia; cf. Hor. C. iii 17,
Aeli vetusto nobilis ab Lamo, etc.; Juv. iv 154, Sed periit (Domitianus)
postquam cerdonibus esse timendus | coeperat .. Hoc nocuit Lamiarum
caede madenti; vi 385, quaedam de numero Lamiarum ac nominis Appi.
officia distribuit: Dio lxvi 2, πολλοῖς ἀρχάς (governorships) τε καὶ
ἐπιτροπείας (procuratorships) αὐτὸς (i.e. Mucianus) καὶ ὁ Δομιτιανὸς ἔδοσαν, καὶ
ἐπάρχους (prefects) ἄλλους ἐπ᾿ ἄλλοις καὶ ὑπάτους (consuls) ἀπέδειξαν. Tacitus
(H. iv 39) describes the reckless conduct of Domitian at Rome before the
arrival of Vespasian: vis penes Mucianum erat; nisi quod pleraque
Domitianus, instigantibus amicis aut propria libidine (“caprice'”), audebat.
Vespasiano dictitante: Dio (l.c.) says that Vespasian wrote to thank
Domitian for not having dismissed him: πάντα αὐτοὶ (i.e. Mucianus and
Dom.) ὡς αὐταρχοῦντες ἐποίουν, ὥστε τὸν Οὐεσπασιανὸν ἐπιστεῖλαί ποτε τῷ
Δομιτιανῷ ὅτι “ χάριν ἔχω σοι, τέκνον, ὅτι με ἐᾷς ἄρχειν καὶ οὐδέπω με καταλέλυκας.”
Reports had reached Vespasian in Egypt of Domitian's presumptuous
behaviour: Tac. iv 51, Vespasianus in Italiam resque urbis intentus
adversam de Domitiano famam accipit, tamquam terminos aetatis et concessa filio egrederetur.
•
CHAPTER 2.
expeditionem incohavit: in 69 A.D. the Batavian auxiliaries of the
Rhine legions under Civilis had revolted, and on the death of Vitellius,
Classicus, prefect of an ala of the Treveri, in concert with Civilis, proclaimed an independent "Imperium Galliarum," to which the Roman
legions in Germany swore allegiance. The government of Vespasian sent
7 legions under Cerealis against Classicus and Civilis, and shortly after,
when exaggerated reports of the rebels' successes reached Rome, Mucianus
and Domitian set out for the war: simul Domitianus Mucianusque accingebantur, dispari animo, ille spe ac iuventa properus, hic moras nectens queis
flagrantem (Domitianum) retineret, ne ferocia aetatis et pravis inpulsoribus,
si exercitum invasisset, paci belloque male consuleret (Tac. Η. iv 68).
When near the Alps, they heard of the defeat of the Treveri by Cerealis,
and Mucianus seized the opportunity to advise Domitian that the subjugation of an already defeated foe was a task unworthy of him, and
that he should merely display from Lugdunum (Lyons) the might and
prestige of imperial power (ib. 85). Domitian saw through the artifice
(ib. 86), but apparently went no farther than Lugdunum. Josephus, the
panegyrist of the Flavian emperors, attributes the surrender of the Treveri
and Batavi to the news of Domitian's approach (Bell. Iud. vii 85 sqq.);
cf. Mart. ii 2, 4: vii 7, 3: Sil. Ital. iii '607, At tu transcendes, Germanice,
facta tuorum, | iam puer auricomo praeformidate Batavo.
Germanias: Germania Superior and Germania Inferior; see on
Vitell. 7, 1.
..
ut fratri se adaequaret: Tacitus (H. iv 86) says that Domitian,
when at Lugdunum, secretly sent envoys to Cerealis asking him if he
would hand over the army and the command to him if he came to the
Rhine. Cerealis eluded the "boyish" request by judicious temporizing,
and it was left uncertain whether Domitian's idea was to wage war
against his father or to provide himself with resources against his brother:
qua cogitatione bellum adversus patrem agitaverit an opes viresque adversus
fratrem, in incerto fuit; nam Cerealis salubri temperamento elusit ut vana
pueriliter cupientem. The ambitious nature of the youthful Domitian is
mentioned in Dio lxvi 3, οὐδὲν γὰρ μικρὸν ἐπενόει.
aetatis: born in 51, he was 18 years old at this time.
habitabat cum patre: that he might be under his father's supervision
Dio
and be made to realize that he was subject to the patria potestas.
(lxvi 9, quoted on c. 3, 1) says that for some time before Vespasian 's
return Domitian had been living at his Alban villa, and that a guilty
conscience made him so apprehensive of his father's arrival that he even
simulated madness, to create an impression that he was not responsible
for his conduct. Vespasian, when emperor, dwelt mainly in the Horti
Sallustiani (between the Quirinal and Pincian hills) and seldom lived in
the Palace (Dio lxvi 10).
sellam: i.e. a sella gestatoria or sedan-chair, the occupants of which
sat upright, as opposed to the lectica or litter in which they were borne
reclining or half-reclining. Dio, lx 2, says that Claudius was the first
emperor to use the sella gestatoria, and that after him emperors and ex-consuls continued to use it down to Dio's day (flor. 180 A.D.); whereas
Augustus and Tiberius had been carried in lecticae, such as were used by
women (and children). See also on Oth. 6, 3, muliebri sella.
quotiens: see on Galb. 10, 2.
triumphum utriusque Iudaicum: for this joint triumph of Vespasian
and Titus see Vesp. 8, 1; Tit. 6, 1.
equo albo comitatus est: cf. Zonar. xi 17, τῶν δ' Ἱεροσολύμων ἁλόντων ὁ
Τίτος εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν ἐπανελθὼν τὰ ἐπινίκια αὐτός τε καὶ ὁ πατὴρ ἐφ᾽ ἅρματος
ἔπεμψαν, συνέπεμψε δέ σφισιν αὐτὰ καὶ ὁ Δομετιανὸς ὑπατεύων (consul) ἐπὶ κέλητος :
Joseph. Bell. Iud. vii 152, μεθ' & Οὐεσπασιανὸς ἤλαυνε πρῶτος, καὶ Τίτος εἵπετο,
Δομετιανὸς δὲ παρίππευεν, αὐτός τε διαπρεπῶς κεκοσμημένος καὶ τὸν ἵππον παρέχων
θέας ἄξιον. At the triumph of Augustus in 29 B.c. for his victory at Actium,
Tiberius (aged 13) rode on the left trace-horse of the emperor's chariot,
while Octavia's son Marcellus (aged 14) rode the one on the right (Suet.
Tib. 6). The white horse of Domitian was in keeping with the white
horses which drew Vespasian and Titus. White chariot-horses, recalling
the white steeds of Jupiter and the Sun (Liv. v 23), were used by Camillus
in his triumph in 396 B.C.; later by Julius Caesar (Dio xliii 14) and by
the emperors (Suet. Ner. 25, Plin. Pan. 22, etc.).
quin et e sex consulatibus: this is Ihm's certain correction for quis
ex or qui sex or in sex of the MSS. Burman had already conjectured quin
ex sex, and Bentley suggested quin ex consulatibus or eque sex or quinis
ex; but quin et is the regular combination in Suet., e.g. Tit. 8, 1; 8,2;
Vesp. 12; Oth. 12, 1. That ex and not in is the prep. required is shown
by Dom. 13, 3, ex quibus (consulatibus) septem medios continuavit;
Claud. 14, ex quibus (consulatibus) duos primos iunctim gessit; Calig. 17, 1,
ex omnibus (consulatibus) duos novissimos coniunxit. The six consulships
referred to are those which Domitian held before Vespasian's death; he
was altogether 17 times consul, see c. 13, 3.
unum ordinarium: he was consul ordinarius in 73 A.D., his colleague
being M. Valerius Messalinus; he was consul suffectus in 71, 75, 76, 77,
79. The consuls elected at the beginning of the year gave their names to
the year and were known as ordinarii; those appointed later in the year
were called suffecti, but their names too were recorded in the Fasti.
From the time of Augustus the consuls elected on Jan. 1 did not usually
hold office throughout the year, but resigned after some months and were
succeeded by suffecti (Dio xlviii 35). In the second half of Augustus'
reign 6 months was the usual tenure; so too under Nero (Suet. Ner. 15,
consulatum in senos plerumque menses dedit); but the tenure mainly
depended on the caprice of the emperor, as in the case of Tiberius.
In
the year of confusion 69 A.D. there were 15 consuls. From the time of
Vespasian 4 months or 2 months became the normal tenure. When the
emperors themselves assumed the consulship, they generally held it for an
even shorter period than private persons, sometimes for a few months,
sometimes only for a few days (Dom. 13, 3). See Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³
82 sqq.
cedente
fratre: Titus was colleague of the emperor Vespasian in
seven consulships 70, 72, 74-77, 79 A.D. Before the consular election in 73
he withdrew in favour of Domitian, and presumably it was in consequence
of his action that Vespasian also decided not to hold the office in that year
(for a list of Vespasian's consulships see on Vesp. 8, 1). By his withdrawal Titus gave another example of the brotherly affection (pietas)
which he always showed towards Domitian in spite of his hostile attitude
(see on Tit. 9, 3). Domitian held his first consulship in 71, when he was
consul suffectus from March 1 to June 30, the ordinarii for the year being
Vespasian and M. Cocceius Nerva. In the same year he appears on coins
as consul designatus iterum, i.e. designated again as consul suffectus for
72, Vespasian and Titus being designated as ordinarii. Apparently at the
spring comitia in 72 Titus allowed Domitian to be designated in his place
as consul ordinarius for 73, and Domitian, waiving his claim to be consul
suffectus in 72, continued to be consul designatus throughout that year,
and then became consul ordinarius on Jan. 1, 73. See Gsell, Essai sur le
régne de l'empereur Domitien p. 19; Weynand, in Pauly-Wissowa vi 2548.
§ 2. simulavit et ipse modestiam: not only did his father humble
him (Dio lxvi 10, ὁ Οὐεσπασιανὸς ἐκείνου ἐταπείνου τὸ φρόνημα), but he himself affected a retiring modesty; cf. Tac. H. iv 86, Domitianus sperni a
senioribus iuventam suam cernens, modica quoque et usurpata antea munia
imperii omittebat, simplicitatis ac modestiae imagine in altitudinem conditus ("wrapping himself in a profound reserve," C. and B.) studiumque
litterarum et amorem carminum simulans, quo velaret animum et fratris
aemulationi subduceretur, cuius disparem mitioremque naturam contra interpretabatur.
poeticae studium: Domitian seems to have essayed epic poetry, his
themes being (a) the fight for the Capitol between the Flavians and
Vitellians in Dec. 69; cf. Mart. v 5, 7, ad Capitolini caelestia carmina
2L
belli | grande cothurnati pone Maronis opus: (b) the Jewish War; cf.
Val. Flacc. i 7 (addressing Vespasian), versam proles tua pandet Idumen |
(namque potest), Solymo nigrantem pulvere fratrem. The astronomical
Aratea sometimes attributed to him is by Germanicus, son of Drusus.
Quintilian (x 1, 91) speaks in extravagantly fulsome terms of Domitian 's
poetic gifts: Hos nominavimus (as epic poets) quia Germanicum Aug. (i.e.
Domitian) ab institutis studiis deflexit cura terrarum, parumque diis visum
est esse eum maximum poetarum. Quid tamen his ipsis eius operibus in
quae donato imperio iuvenis secesserat sublimius, doctius, omnibus denique
numeris praestantius? Quis enim caneret bella melius quam qui sic gerit?
Quem praesidentes studiis deae propius audirent? etc. So too Pliny (N.H.
praef. 5) praises Titus as a poet who could emulate his brother: Quantus
in poetica es! O magna fecunditas animi! quemadmodum fratrem quoque
imiteris excogitasti. Silius Italicus (iii 619) says of Domitian: Quin et
Romuleos superabit voce nepotes | quis erit eloquio partum decus: huic sua
Musae | sacra ferent, etc.
postea spretum et abiectum: see c. 20.
recitavit publice: a practice indulged in even by emperors. Claudius
gave constant recitals of his prose works through a professional reader
(Claud. 41, assidue recitavit per lectorem). Nero recited his poems himself, not only at home but in the theatre; this caused such delight that a
festival of thanksgiving was voted and the poems, inscribed in letters of
gold, were dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus (Ner. 10). On the subject of
recitationes, which were such a feature (and such an infliction) of social
life under the Empire, see Friedl. Sitteng. ii¹º 225 sqq.
setius: see on Tit. 5, 3.
Vologaesus: see on Vesp. 6, 4.
Alanos: a great nomad race, divided into various branches, dwelling
in the steppes north of the Caspian and from the Tanais (Don) to the
Caucasus. Pompey in the war against Mithridates came in contact with
the "duros aeterni Martis Alanos” (Luc. viii 223; cf. Amm. Marc. xxiii 5).
Nero shortly before his death was preparing an expedition against them
(Тас. Н. і 6). Their devastating incursion into Media and Armenia in
the time of Vespasian is described in Joseph. Bell. Iud. vii 244 sqq.
Vespasian took measures to guard the Caucasus passes against them, and
a Roman garrison was stationed beyond the Armenian frontier in the
Iberian fortress Harmozika near Tiflis (see Mommsen, Prov. Rom. Emp.
ii 64). Later, under Hadrian, the Alani renewed their inroads (Dio lxix 15),
and it was then that the historian Arrian, prefect of Cappadocia, wrote
his "Εκταξις κατ' 'Αλανῶν on the tactics to be used against them.
quia discussa res est: discutere (lit. 'to pull to pieces'") was used in
the sense of irritum facere "to bring to nought," "to render null and
void"; cf. Cic. Q. Fr. ii 10 (12), de Commageno, quod rem totam discusseram, mirifice mihi blanditur Appius: Liv. xxxiv 56, eam rem litterae
Ti. Sempronii discusserunt: xxxix 10, obsecrare ut eam rem quocumque
modo discuteret. Dio, lxvi 15, says that Vespasian declined to meddle in
a conflict between the Parthians and Alans which did not concern him:
τοῖς δὲ Πάρθοις πολεμωθεῖσι πρός τινας, καὶ τῆς παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ συμμαχίας δεηθεῖσιν οὐκ
ἐβοήθησεν, εἰπὼν ὅτι οὐ προσήκει αὐτῷ τὰ ἀλλότρια πολυπράγμονεῖν. Imhof (T.
Flav. Domitianus, p. 33) thinks that a more genuine reason for Vespasian 's
refusal was his unwillingness to send Domitian at the head of an army
to the East. Vologaesus had cause to feel hurt by Vespasian's refusal,
for he had laid Vesp. under an obligation by his offer to provide him
with 40,000 Parthian bowmen to aid him against Vitellius (Vesp. 6, 4).
alios Orientis reges: Tiridates, king of Armenia, and Pacorus, king
of Media, whose kingdoms had been overrun and ravaged by the Alani,
were both brothers of Vologaesus. The solicitations of Domitian would
be addressed principally to the king of Armenia, as his was a vassal
kingdom in alliance with Rome.
§ 3. patre defuncto: Vespasian died on June 23, 79 A.D. (Vesp. 24).
cunctatus an: for the indirect question with cunctari cf. c. 17, 1,
cunctantibus conspiratis, quando et quomodo aggrederentur: Claud. 21,
6, diu cunctatus an omnes igni ferroque absumeret: Plin. Ep. vi 16, 11,
cunctatus paulum an retro flecteret: Stat. Th. xi 595, cunctatur nescia
virgo, | quid paret. First in Sall. Cat. 52, de parricidis quid statuatis,
cunctamini?
duplum donativum: i.e. double the largess which his brother Titus
offered them to ensure their support. The elevation to power of a new
emperor was preceded or followed by a donativum to the soldiers. Augustus
left by will a donativum of 1000 sesterces for each praetorian, 500 for
each soldier of the urban cohorts, and 300 for each legionary; the total
amount thus distributed by his heir and successor Tiberius being nearly
72,000,000 sesterces. Tiberius, in turn, bequeathed a donativum of the
same amount, which Caligula on his accession doubled. Claudius on
receiving the imperium bought the loyalty of the praetorians by a largess
of 15,000 sesterces to each, and gave the same sum each year on the
anniversary of his accession. Nero paid the same price. Galba estranged
the army by refusing a “donativum grandius solito" which had been
promised (see Galb. 16, 1). Vitellius, lacking money, gave the soldiers
every licence in lieu thereof (Tac. H. ii 94). Vespasian paid each man
merely 100 sesterces, and was none the less well served (Dio lxv 22, Tac.
H. ii 82). The amounts paid by Titus and Domitian are not specified.
Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus, and M. Aurelius paid 20,000 sesterces. See
Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 140; Daremberg-Saglio, ii 385.
participem imperii: Domitian's expectation that he would be left
particeps imperii with Titus was not fulfilled, but Titus from the very
beginning of his reign was ready to proclaim him as his consors and
successor (Tit. 9, 3, where see note). Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vi 32)
says that Domitian poisoned Titus, not because he objected to sharing
the throne with his brother, but to sharing it with one who was both
gentle and good: οὐ τὸ ξὺν ἀδελφῷ ἄρχειν δεινὸν ἡγούμενος, ἀλλὰ τὸ ξὺν πράῳ τε
καὶ χρηστῷ.
fraudem testamento adhibitam: the allegation being that this was
done by Titus, who possessed the qualifications of a master forger, if he
chose to use them; see Tit. 3, 2.
insidias struere fratri: cf. Tit. 9, 3, fratrem insidiari sibi non
desinentem, sed paene ex professo sollicitantem exercitus, etc.: Dio lxvi 26,
(ὁ Τίτος) μετήλλαξεν (obiit) .. ὡς μὲν ἡ φήμη λέγει πρὸς τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ ἀναλωθείς,
ὅτι καὶ πρότερον ἐπεβεβούλευτο ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ.
2L2
pro mortuo deseri iussit: for the conflicting accounts of the death
of Titus and the charges made against Domitian, either of poisoning him
or of accelerating his death when he was ill, see on Tit. 11. Dio (l.c.)
says that while Titus was still breathing, Domitian rode post-haste to
Rome, entered the praetorian camp, received the title and authority of
emperor, and gave the soldiers the same donativum as Titus had done.
For pro see on Vitell. 3, 2, pro afflicto lamentata est.
consecrationis: cf. Dio lxvii 2, αὐτός τε γὰρ καὶ φιλεῖν τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ
πενθεῖν προσεποιεῖτο, καὶ τούς τε ἐπαίνους τοὺς ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ μετὰ δακρύων ἔλεξε, καὶ ἐς
τοὺς ἥρωας αὐτὸν σπουδῇ ἐσέγραψε, πάντα τὰ ἐναντιώτατα ὧν ἠβούλετο σκηπτόμενος:
Eutrop. vii 22, (Titus) inter divos relatus est. Pliny, Paneg. 11 (quoted on
Vesp. 23 ad fin.), asserts that Titus deified Vespasian, and Domitian deified
Titus, merely in order that they might be thought, the one a son, the other
a brother of a god. Domitian built in the Campus Martius an elaborate
Porticus Divorum containing two aedes for the worship of the deified
Vespasian and Titus, hoping doubtless that there would be a third aedes
in his own honour when he was consecrated (Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr.
Rom i 3, 565). Domitian, however, was not deified.
obliquis orationibus: these orationes were those known as orationes
principis ad senatum. The proposals (relationes) which the emperor
brought before the senate, though in form they kept up the fiction that
the emperor himself was speaking, were usually read to the senate by one
of the quaestores Caesaris (see on Tit. 6, 1). For the use of obliquus
"indirect" cf. Tac. A. xiv 11, temporum Claudianorum obliqua insectatione:
[Aur. Vict.] Epit. 9, causidicorum obliqua dicta (= 'figurae,” Vesp. 13):
Amm. Marc. xv 5, 4, Silvano rogante obliquis verbis; so too the adv., e.g.
Tac. A. v 2, consulem oblique perstringens.
edictis: addressed to the people; see on Tit. 8, 1. An example of an
edict of Domitian which reflected on Titus was that in which he forbade
the making of eunuchs; see on Dom. 7, 1.
CHAPTER 3.
inter initia principatus: cf. Ner. 22, 1, inter initia imperii; so inter
initia without gen., e.g. Dom. 9, 1, inter initia ab omni caede abhorrebat. This use of inter initia for initio is post-Aug. (Kühner-Stegmann, i
551).
secretum sibi horarum sumere solebat: it is very doubtful whether
horarum for aliquot horarum is defensible. horarium is the reading in
the Ed. Rom. ii (1470) and the Ed. Venet. (1471). The adj. horarius
(= unius horae), with which Wolf compares momentarius and temporarius,
does not occur in any other author, and is not given in any of the MSS.;
a subst. horarium (= horologium, an instrument for measuring time) is
found in Censorinus. Most probably some numeral has fallen out before
horarum (or after it, according to Casaubon, who proposed horarum iii).
Voss conjectured lararium, which is very improbable. The same difficulty
arises in Ner. 37, 2, mori iussis non amplius quam horarum spatium dabat,
where G has iii horarum, and some of the late MSS. duarum horarum;
Beroaldus read horarium.
For secretum see on Oth. 3, 1; cf. Tac. Agr. 39, (Domitianus) secreto
suo satiatus, "after taking his fill of his usual seclusion" (Furneaux-Anderson). The inaccessible solitude in which Domitian spent so much
time brooding during the years of his despotic cruelty at Rome is mentioned in Plin. Pan. 48, non adire quisquam, non alloqui, audebat, tenebras
semper secretumque captantem; nec unquam ex solitudine sua prodeuntem,
nisi ut solitudinem faceret.
nec quicquam amplius quam: see on c. 21, nihil aliud quam deambulabat.
muscas configere: Dio (lxvi 9) says that Domitian did this in
his Alban villa at the time when he was pretending to be half-witted,
through fear of Vespasian's wrath on his return to Italy, and that he
kept up the practice when he became emperor: ὑπὸ γὰρ τοῦ συνειδότος ὧν
TE
ἐφρόνει καὶ ὧν ἐπεποιήκει οὔτε ἐθάρσει, καὶ προσέτι καὶ μωρίαν ἔστιν ὅτε
προσεποιεῖτο. ἐν γοῦν τῷ ᾿Αλβανῷ χωρίῳ τὰ πλεῖστα διάγων ἄλλα τε πολλὰ καὶ
γελοῖα ἔπραττε, καὶ τὰς μυίας γραφείοις κατεκέντει. τοῦτο γὰρ εἰ καὶ ἀνάξιον τοῦ
τῆς ἱστορίας ὄγκου ἐστίν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι γε ἱκανῶς τὸν τρόπον αὐτοῦ ἐνδείκνυται, ἀναγκαίως
ἔγραψα· καὶ μάλισθ' ὅτι καὶ μοναρχήσας ὁμοίως αὐτὸ ἐποίει, Aurelius Victor
(Caes. 11, 5) assigns it to the period of Domitian's reign when he was
enervated by his excesses: dehinc atrox caedibus bonorum segnisque,
ridicule, remotis procul omnibus, muscarum agmina persequebatur, postquam ad libidinem minus virium erat.
stilo praeacuto: the stilus (γραφίς, γραφεῖον, graphium), which was used
for writing on wax-covered tablets, was made of bone, ivory, or metal
and was sharpened to a very fine point, the upper end being generally
circular and flat for the purpose of smoothing the wax and deleting what
had been written. It could be used as a weapon; e.g. Julius Caesar, when
he was attacked by the conspirators, stabbed Casca through the arm
with a graphium or stilus (Suet. Iul. 82).
Vibio Crispo Q. Vibius Crispus was consul (suffectus) under Nero,
and a second and third time under Vespasian or Domitian; proconsul of
Africa under Vespasian. As a pleader he accumulated a vast fortune
(300,000,000 sesterces, according to Tac. Dial. 8; cf. Mart. iv 54, 7, divitior
Crispo). Tacitus (H. ii 10) describes him as “pecunia potentia ingenio.
inter claros magis quam inter bonos.” His eloquence is praised by
Quintilian, x 1, 119, Vibius Crispus compositus (“finished'') et iucundus
et delectationi natus. He was one of Vespasian's chief friends; cf. Tac.
Dial. 8, (Marcellus Eprius et Crispus Vibius) per multos iam annos potentissimi sunt civitatis ac, donec libuit, principes fori, nunc principes in Caesaris
(i.e. Vespasian) amicitia agunt feruntque cuncta. Juvenal (iv 81 sqq.)
mentions him as a councillor of Domitian and says that he owed his long
life of 80 years to his unfailing astuteness in swimming with the stream
(numquam direxit bracchia contra | torrentem). One of his best known
mots was on the banquets of Vitellius (see note on Vitell. 13, 1). Quintilian
(v 13, 48: viii 5, 15) gives other examples of his wit.
ne muscam quidem: Dio lxvi 9, ὅθεν οὐκ ἀχαρίτως τις εἶπε πρὸς τὸν
ἐρωτῶντα “ τί πράττει Δομιτιανός;” ὅτι “ ἰδιάζει τε, καὶ οὐδὲ μυῖα αὐτῷ
παρακάθηται.” So in [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, 8, Hinc percontanti cuidam,
quisquamne in palatio esset, responsum “Ne musca quidem"; in Aur.
Vict. Caes. 11, 5 the reply is given as "Ne musca quidem, nisi forte apud
palaestram.” A proverbial method of describing a deserted place was to
say that not even a fly was there; cf. Plaut. Truc. 281, Quas tu mulieres |
mihi narras? ubi musca nulla femina est in aedibus (i.e. not even a
female fly). Otto, Sprichw. p. 235.
Domitiam: see c. 1, 3.
=
in secundo suo consulatu: in 73 A.D.; see on c. 2, 1.
filium tulerat :
filium sustulerat, susceperat; see on Vesp. 3. The
name of the boy is unknown; for the view that it was "Vespasianus" see
on "Vespasianum," Dom. 15, 1. He probably died in the first few years
of his father's reign. From the fact that on the coins where the boy
appears as "Divus Caesar” Domitian does not bear the title "Germanicus,"
which he assumed in 83 after his victory over the Chatti (c. 6, 1), it has
been inferred that the son died before that year (Gsell, op. cit. 53, n. 4;
Stein, in Pauly-Wissowa v 1514). His deification is referred to in Stat.
S. i 1, 97: Sil. Ital. iii 629. Martial (iv 3), describing Domitian sitting
through a fall of snow at the games in 88, represents the snow-shower as
a prank of the deified boy: Quis siccis (“frozen”) lascivit aquis et ab
aethere ludit? Suspicor has pueri Caesaris esse nives. For the coins of
his mother Domitia on which the youthful “Divus Caesar" figures see
Eckhel, vi 401: Cohen, i² 535.
alteroque anno filiam, consalutavit Augustam: a reading suggested
by Madvig (Adv. Crit. ii 581), which I have adopted faute de mieux, though
there is no evidence that Domitian had any children except the one son.
Roth had already conjectured consalutavit, concluding that this is given
in a dismembered form in M, where the reading is alteroque anno consulatu
filium *** vit Augustam (some letters being erased before vit, while a
later hand has written on the margin deest aliquid). The other MSS. have
either consulatus (-tu in R) filium et Augustam (Gr) or consalutaverat ut
Augustam (X). The latter is the vulgate before Roth's ed.; but Domitian
cannot have saluted Domitia as "Augusta" in 74, seven years before he
was emperor. This chronological difficulty may be removed by reading
ex qua in septimo (for secundo, i.e. IN VII for IN II) suo consulatu
filium tulerat, alteroque anno consalutaverat Augustam. Suetonius would
thus put the son's birth in 80; and say correctly that Domitian saluted
Domitia as "Augusta" in 81 when he became emperor. For the omission
of the relative pronoun (quam) in the second clause see the examples in
Kühner-Stegmann, ii p. 324. In the texts of Roth and Preud'homme a
lacuna is marked between tulerat and alteroque anno consalutavit Augustam;
in that of Ihm between anno and consalutavit Augustam. Numerous
corrections have been proposed; e.g. alteroque anno a consulatu filiam,
Augustam eandem ... repudiavit (Lipsius): in octavo suo consulatu...
alteroque anno ab hoc consulatu filiam, Augustam eandem
repudiavit
(Graevius): alteroque anno suo consalutaverat Augustam, etc. (Ernesti,
who deletes suo after secundo and explains anno suo as "year of his
reign''): filiam tulerat alteroque anno filium, ac consalutaverat Augustam
(Oudendorp): alterumque imperii altero anno, consalutavit Augustam
(Mommsen): alteroque anno principatus [or quam imperium adeptus est]
amisit (Ihm): filiam tulerat alteroque anno principatus filium, eodem illo
anno consalutavit Augustam (Alexander).
..
consalutavit: this compound, which generally denotes the mutual
greetings of a number of friends or the acclamations of a multitude (e.g.
Dom. 1, 3: Tit, 5, 2), is rarely used of individuals; cf. Tac. H. i 57, is
..
imperatorem Vitellium consalutavit: Petron. Satyr. 7, 131: Apul. Met.
viii 31.
Augustam: Domitia must have received this title about the time of
Domitian's accession (Sept. 13, 81), for she is so styled in the Acta Arvalia
of Oct. 1, 81 (C.I.L. vi 2060, Henzen p. cxi); cf. Euseb.-Hieron. Chron.
p. 160 Schoene, under the year 2097 (Oct. 1, 80-Sept. 30, 81): Domitiani
uxor Augusta appellata. The title of "Augusta" was first conferred by
Augustus in his will on his wife Livia (Tac. A. i 8). Caligula offered it
to his grandmother Antonia, wife of Drusus, mother of Germanicus and
Claudius (Calig. 15); she refused it during her lifetime, and Claudius
conferred it on her after her death (Claud. 11). Agrippina, wife of
Claudius and mother of Nero, was styled "Augusta" (Tac. A. xii 26),
as were Poppaea, wife of Nero, and her daughter Claudia (A. xv 23).
Vitellius honoured his mother with the title (id. H. ii 89). Julia, daughter
of Titus, appears as "Augusta" on the coins of her father (see on Tit. 4,
2). For the various inscriptions and coins where Domitia bears this title
see Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii 26. From Domitian's time the wife of
the emperor is regularly called "Augusta." Cf. Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³
821.
Paridis: a famous pantomimus, born in Egypt, who was the darling
of the licentious Roman matrons, and was so influential at the court of
Domitian that appointment to posts of state depended on his patronage.
The alleged banishment of Juvenal to Egypt is said (Schol. Juv. i 1, vii 92)
to have been due to his attack on Paris in Sat. vii 86 sqq. (cf. vi 82 sqq.).
Dio (lxvii 3) states that Domitian caused Paris to be murdered in the
public street for intriguing with Domitia, and also put to death some of
his admirers who scattered flowers and perfumes on the spot where he
fell. Suetonius (c. 10 infr.) says that Dom. put to death a pupil of
Paris, who resembled his master in form and skill. Martial (xi 13) has a
well-known epitaph on Paris: Urbis deliciae salesque Nili, | ars et gratia,
lusus et voluptas, | Romani decus et dolor theatri | atque omnes Veneres
Cupidinesque | hoc sunt condita, quo Paris, sepulcro.
amore deperditam: see on Vesp. 22, quasi amore suo deperiret.
repudiavit: according to Dio (lxvii 3), Domitian had thoughts of
putting Domitia to death, but he spared her on the intercession of Ursus
(i.e. Flavius Ursus, to whom Statius addresses Silv. ii 6). She was
banished from court probably between the end of 82 and 84 A.D.; see Stein
in Pauly-Wissowa, v 1515.
quasi efflagitante populo: Dio (l.c.) mentions this demand of the people
as a fact: εἶτα δεηθέντος τοῦ δήμου κατηλλάγη τῇ Δομιτίᾳ. Quasi (like ut,
velut, sicut, tanquam, nec aliter quam, haud secus quam, perinde atque).
was used, especially in post-class. writers, with participial clauses in a
subjective sense to express an ostensible reason, a pretended motive, an
imaginary condition, etc. (Kühner-Stegmann, i 790 sq.).
reduxit: Domitia, though taken back by Domitian, lived in constant
dread of his vengeance, and she was privy to the plot which brought about
his death; see c. 14, 1. It is uncertain whether she bore any more
children to him; but Martial (vi 3, in 90 A.D.) refers to the expected birth
of an imperial offspring. Domitia outlived Domitian by many years, and
probably died not long before 140 A.D. (Stein, l.c.).
§ 2. circa administrationem:
cf. Iul. 45, 2, circa corporis curam
morosior: Tib. 69, circa deos ac religiones neglegentior: Ner. 51, circa
cultum habitumque adeo pudendus. This use of circa in the sense of de or
quod attinet ad is not found in class. Lat. (Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 253).
For other meanings of circa in Suet. see on Oth. 11, 2.
mixtura quoque .. vitiorum atque virtutum: cf. Tac. H. i 10, Mucianus
malis bonisque artibus mixtus: id. A. vi 51, (Tiberius) inter bona
malaque mixtus incolumi matre. It is probable that quoque is a corruption
due to the following quoque, and that the correct reading is mixturaque
(Lipsius). Bentley suggested mixtura prope aequabili; Ernesti reads
mixtura aequabili.
=
super ingenii naturam: super is difficult: the context clearly requires
Rolfe's rendering “contrary to" (so Stahr wider seine angeborene
Natur''), but there does not seem to be any parallel to this; if, as most
do, we take super praeter (cf. Oth. 5, 1), then the statement that
Domitian's natural tendencies to rapacity and cruelty were increased by
need and fear contradicts what Suetonius says in c. 9 about his natural
mildness and freedom from avarice, his later rapacity and cruelty being
described in c. 10 and c. 12. It is possible that natura should be read,
and super taken in the sense of de (cf. Iul. 5: 20, 1: Tib. 13, 2), the
meaning being "as far as one can guess about his natural disposition, it
was need that made him rapacious and fear that made him cruel.”
CHAPTER 4.
amphitheatro: the Flavian amphitheatre (Colosseum); see Vesp. 9, 1:
Tit. 7, 3.
Circo: the Circus Maximus in the valley between the Aventine and
Palatine hills. It was improved by Julius Caesar to hold 150,000
spectators. As the upper tiers of seats and the galleries were of wood,
it suffered repeatedly from fires. Augustus restored it with added
splendour after a destructive fire in 31 B.c. It was partly burned down
in 36 A.D. and Claudius restored and enlarged it to accommodate 250,000.
Nero had it rebuilt within four years after the great fire at Rome in 64 A.D.
which broke out in the Circus (Tac. 4. xv 38). In Domitian's reign the
Circus was once more damaged by fire (see Dom. 5).
bigarum quadrigarumque cursus: racing-chariots were usually bigae
and quadrigae, sometimes trigae, and exceptional instances of six-horsed
chariots (seiuges, seiugae) are mentioned. Connected with the chariotraces were the races between the riders of two horses, who leaped from one
to the other during the race (desultores); cf. Iul. 39, 2, circensibus
quadrigas bigasque et equos desultorios agitaverunt nobilissimi iuvenes:
Dion. Hal. vii 73, πρῶτος ὁ τῶν τεθρίππων τε καὶ συνωρίδων καὶ τῶν ἀζεύκτων
ἵππων ἐγίγνετο δρόμος. See Friedlaender in Marquardt Staatsv. iii² 524.
...
proelium
equestre ac pedestre: these conflicts between divisions
of troops, foot or cavalry, were a development of the armaturae or military
evolutions, either on horseback (arm. equestris) or on foot (arm. pedestris),
and the mock-fights carried out by the young citizens in the Circus from
the days of the Republic (cf. Liv. xliv 9). Distinct from the armatura
equestris was the Ludus Troiae or manoeuvres executed on horseback by
the young nobles (Iul. 39, Aug. 43, Calig. 18, Claud. 21; cf. Verg. Aen. v
596 sqq.). Julius Caesar in his triumphal games included a battle between
two opposing armies, with 500 foot-soldiers, 20 elephants, and 30 horsemen
on each side (Iul. 39).
commisit: see on Galb. 6, 1, commissione ludorum Floralium.
at: see on Vesp. 5, 5.
in amphitheatro navale proelium: no details of this naval spectacle
are given by any writer. Nero, in 57 or 58 A.D., flooded the arena of the
amphitheatre which he built in the Campus Martius, and exhibited a naval
battle between the Athenians and Persians, the water containing fish and
sea-monsters of all kinds (Ner. 12); he gave a similar spectacle in 64
(Dio lxii 15). In 80 A.D. Titus used the flooded arena of the new Flavian
amphitheatre for a battle between the Corcyraeans and Corinthians (Dio
lxvi 25; see on Tit. 7, 3).
nam: see on Vesp. 12. A sea-fight in the amphitheatre was not the
only unusual spectacle he gave, for he also gave venationes, etc., by
artificial light, and held contests between women as well as men.
venationes: spectacles in which wild animals were killed by other
animals or by men. They were introduced at Rome by M. Fulvius Nobilior
at his triumphal games in 186 B.C. They became more and more elaborate,
and under the Empire a wonderful variety of animals was provided: lions,
tigers, bears, panthers, leopards, elephants, hippopotami, rhinoceroses,
crocodiles, etc. At first they formed part of the Ludi Circenses. Julius
Caesar built a wooden amphitheatre for the venationes (θέατρον κυνηγετικόν,
Dio xliii 22; Dio uses the same phrase for the amphitheatre of Statilius
Taurus, and for that of Titus). They continued, however, to be given in
the Circus as well as in the amphitheatre. The men who fought against
the beasts (bestiarii) were condemned criminals or prisoners of war or
hirelings who were trained in a special school for the purpose (ludus
bestiariorum). See Friedl., Sitteng. ii10 77 sqq.
ad lychnuchos: cf. Cic. Quint. Fr. iii 7, 2, ad lychnuchum ligneolum
scribere; so ad lumina "by torch light" (Calig. 45, 1, etc.), ad lunam
(Aen. iv 513), ad lucernam (Flor. iv 2, 71). The lychnuchus (λυχνοῦχος)
was a lampholder or candelabrum; for the varieties see Marquardt,
Privatl.2 711. Julius Caesar at his triumph "ascendit Capitolium ad
lumina, quadraginta elephantis dextra sinistraque lychnuchos gestantibus”
(Iul. 37, 2). Statius (Silv. i 6, 85 sqq.) describes the illumination of the
amphitheatre at one of Domitian's entertainments: Vixdum caerula nox
subibat orbem, | descendit media nitens harena | densas flammeus orbis
inter umbras | vincens Gnosiacae facem coronae (i.e. Ariadne's crown). |
Conlucet polus ignibus nihilque | obscurae patitur licere nocti. Vollmer
(ad loc.) points out that as the amphitheatre was open to the sky the
lights must have been hung from a huge post in the centre of the arena.
nec modo, sed et see on Tit. 8, 3.
pugnas feminarum: in Nero's reign women of high family took part
in the gladiatorial combats and the venationes; cf. Tac. A. xv 32, feminarum
illustrium senatorumque plures per harenam foedati: Juv. i 22, cum
Mevia Tuscum | figat aprum et nuda teneat venabula mamma (where see
Mayor). Titus, at the dedication of the new amphitheatre, had some of the
9000 beasts in the venatio (Tit. 7, 3) slain by women of low rank (γυναῖκες,
οὐ μέντοι ἐπιφανεῖς, Dio lxvi 25). The participation by women in the contests of the arena under Domitian is also mentioned by Dio, lxvii 8, ἔστιν
ὅτε καὶ νάνους (“dwarfs'") καὶ γυναῖκας συνέβαλλε (committebat); cf. Stat.
S. i 6, 53, stat sexus rudis insciusque ferri | et pugnas capit improbus
viriles; Mart. Spect. 6, etc. In 200 A.D. Septimius Severus forbade women
to enter the arena (Dio lxxv 16).
quaestoriis muneribus: Claudius in 47 A.D. had imposed on the quaestors
the duty of furnishing gladiatorial shows at their own expense. Suetonius
(Claud. 24) says he put this burden on the "college of quaestors" in lieu
of paving the streets: Collegio quaestorum pro stratura viarum gladiatorium munus iniunxit (for street-paving as a charge borne by quaestors
see Hirschfeld, Kais. Verwaltungsb. p. 261). Claudius was acting on a
resolution moved by a servile senator Dolabella: Tac. A. xi 22, P. Dolabella
censuit spectaculum gladiatorum per omnes annos celebrandum pecunia
eorum qui quaesturam adipiscerentur. The burden fell on quaestores designati as we see from Tac. A. xiii 5, where its abolition under Nero in 54 A.D.
is mentioned: ne designatis quaestoribus edendi gladiatores necessitas
esset. It was reimposed by Domitian, and continued to the end of the
Empire.
=
olim:
iamdudum, iamdiu, πάλαι. This use of olim is peculiar to
writers of the Silver age.
paria postulandi: Seneca (Ep. 7, 4) distinguishes ordinaria paria
(par = pair of gladiators) from postulaticia paria, the latter being kept in
reserve by the munerarius and only produced in response to the insistent calls
of the spectators (Summers ad loc.). Such demands of the spectators are
often mentioned; e.g. Claud. 21, 5, cum Palumbum (a gladiator) postulantibus
daturum se promisit, etc.: Mart. Spect. 20, Cum peteret pars haec Myrinum,
pars illa Triumphum, | promisit pariter Caesar utraque manu. | Non potuit
melius litem finire iocosam. | O dulce invicti principis ingenium! (Friedlaender says that Myrinus and Triumphus were bestiarii, as in the case of
gladiators the spectators would clamour for a special pair.)
e suo ludo: a ludus gladiatorius, or training-school for gladiators,
belonging to the emperor Caligula is mentioned in Plin. N.H. xi 245.
Later there were four imperial schools at Rome: (1) the ludus matutinus
for the training of bestiarii (this probably existed in the time of Claudius);
(2) the ludus magnus; (3) the ludus Gallicus; (4) the ludus Dacicus.
It is generally held that the last three were established by Domitian as
dependencies of the Colosseum; the Gallicus and Dacicus deriving their
names from the nationality of the gladiators trained there. See Daremberg-Saglio, ii 1580. When ludus is used without specification, as here and in
c. 17, it probably means the ludus magnus (Hirschfeld, op. cit. 290).
Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 1071) thinks that after the building of the Colosseum
private individuals were forbidden to maintain troupes of gladiators at
Rome as they had been in the habit of doing. Imperial gladiatorial schools
were also to be found in other parts of Italy (e.g. Capua and Praeneste)
and in the provinces.
aulico apparatu: more splendidly accoutred than the ordinary
gladiators supplied by the lanista to the munerarius (see on Vitell. 12).
Pertinax sold as part of the belongings of Commodus “arma gladiatoria
gemmis auroque composita" and also "torques (necklets) gladiatorias”
(Capitol. Pert. 8). On the rich and artistic equipment of gladiators see
Friedl. Sitteng. ii10 60. The adj. aulicus (αὐλικός, = ad aulam, i.e. domum
regiam, pertinens) is also used by Suet. in Ner. 45, 1, aulicis luctatoribus;
Oth. 2, 2, aulicam libertinam. The word occurs only once earlier as a
subst., "courtier," in Nepos Dat. 5, 2, invidiam aulicorum excepit; so in
Suet. Calig. 19, 3, causam ab interioribus aulicis (“"most confidential
courtiers'') proditam. For apparatus (sumptuousness, magnificence) cf.
Vitell. 10, 1: Claud. 17, 2, triumphavit maximo apparatu: Cic. Tusc. v 9,
maximo ludorum apparatu; Cic. Off. ii 55, ludorum venationumque apparatu
pecunias profundunt.
§ 2. coccinatus: this rare form (= coccino indutus) occurs in Mart. i
96, 6; ν 35, 2. Suetonius also uses the subst. coccum for scarlet (threads
or strands); Ner. 30, 3, purpura coccoque funibus nexis. The dye was got
from a worm, the cochineal kermes (coccus ilicis); Pliny (N.H. ix 141)
wrongly describes it as a vegetable product (granum). See Marquardt,
Privatl.2 506.
parvo portentosoque capite: "with a small and monstrously misshapen head"; or "with a prodigiously small head" (Thomson-Forester).
portentosus is often used of monstrous growths, freaks of nature; e.g.
Cic. Div. ii 28, 60, si quando aliqua portentosa aut ex pecude aut ex
homine nata dicuntur; so too prodigiosus, e.g. Quintil. ii. 5, 11, distortis et quocunque modo prodigiosis corporibus. Dwarfs and physical
monstrosities of every kind enjoyed extraordinary favour both at Court
and among the wealthy classes at Rome under the Empire. Augustus was
exceptional in his loathing for them; cf. Aug. 83, pumilos (‘dwarfs'')
atque distortos et omnes generis eiusdem, ut ludibria naturae malique
ominis abhorrebat. Mayor on Juv. viii 32 has collected a number of
passages on this subject; cf. Friedl. Sitteng. ii¹º 372. Ernesti needlessly
proposed to alter parvo to pravo.
cum quo: here (as in Iul. 6, 2; 52, 1: Aug. 35, 3: Tib. 4, 3) Suetonius
puts cum before the relative, an order of words found at times in Cic.
and constantly in Nepos and Livy (Kühner-Stegmann, i 585).
auditus est dum ex eo quaerit: a remarkable constr. instead of
the normal cum ex eo quaereret. At a dinner given by Tiberius, a dwarf
who was standing by among the jesters suddenly asked Tiberius why
Paconius, who was charged with treason, remained so long alive; the
emperor rebuked him for his pertness, but a few days later wrote to the
senate to expedite the execution of Paconius (Tib. 61).
ordinatione: = constitutione praesidum provinciarum (Baumg.-Cr.). See
on ‘‘ordinavit,” Vesp. 23, 2.
Aegypto praeficere: see on “praefectus Aegypti,” Vesp. 6, 3.
Mettium Rufum: Marcus Iunius Mettius Rufus is frequently mentioned in papyri as prefect of Egypt. These references (including Pap.
Hamb. i 2 p. 125 sq., Pap. Oxyrh. i 72, 10, ii 237 col. viii 43, ii 247, Рар.
Strassb. 22, 25, Pap. Amherst. 68 col. ii p. 81) are tabulated in chronological order by Janssen (ad loc.), who shows that Rufus was already
prefect (ἡγεμών) in Aug. 89, and that he was still in office in 94; his
successor Petronius Secundus is mentioned as prefect in March 95 (Dessau,
Inscr. Lat. 8759 d.). See also Mommsen, Eph. Epigr. vii p. 427; Dessau,
Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii p. 374.
edidit navales pugnas.. lacu: Dio lxvii 8, ἐν καινῷ τινι χωρίῳ ναυμαχίαν
ἐπετέλεσε. The "new place" of which Dio speaks is distinguished from
the vetus naumachia of Augustus used also by Titus (see on Tit. 7, 3).
The new basin which Domitian constructed was probably in the Vatican
valley.
The title regio Naumachiae for the quarter extending from
St. Peter's to the Castle of St. Angelo (Mausoleum Hadriani) survived all
through the Middle Ages; see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Rom i 3, 661.
Domitian's basin was destroyed in a short time and the stone was used
for other purposes (Dom. 5).
iustarum: "regular," "full-sized.” Suetonius is fond of the use
of iustus in the sense of “qualis quis ex iure esse debet vel ex recepta
consuetudine esse solet” (Baumg.-Cr.); e.g. Vesp. 3, habuit paene iustae
uxoris loco: Galb. 12, 2, iustos milites fecerat: Vitell. 15, 1, iustae militiae
commoda: Galb. 21, statura fuit iusta: Claud. 17, 1, iusti triumphi decus.
inter
imbres perspectavit: Dio (l.c.) says that not only did nearly
all of the combatants in the naval fight die, but also many of the spectators.
When a violent storm with torrential rain came on, Domitian allowed no
one to leave, and though he changed his own robe, nobody else was allowed
to do so; in consequence, numbers fell sick and died. To console the
populace, Domitian gave a public banquet lasting all night long.
§ 3. fecit ludos Saeculares: in 88 A.D. Tacitus, who was one of the
Quindecimviri sacris faciundis who had charge of the Ludi Saeculares,
when mentioning (A. xi 11) the previous celebration under Claudius in 47,
refrains from describing them, as he says he had already given a description
of those of Domitian (in one of the books of the Historiae now lost).
Other references to Domitian's celebration are in Mart. iv 1, 7, Hic (i.e.
Domitian) colat ingenti redeuntia saecula lustro, | et quae Romuleus sacra
Tarentos habet; x 63,3; Stat. Silv. i 4, 17; iv 1, 37 (Janus addresses
Domitian), mecum altera saecula condes | et tibi longaevi revocabitur ara
Tarenti. In these passages Tarentos (-um) is the name of a volcanic fissure
in the Campus Martius where there was an ara Ditis patris et Proserpinae
and the Ludi Saeculares were performed; hence, under the Republic, they
were called the Ludi Tarentini. The festival lasted three days and three
nights. The ceremonies are described in Zosimus ii 5 (quoted in full by
Wickham in his Introd. to the Carmen Saeculare of Horace, an ode sung
to Apollo in the celebration by Augustus in 17 в.с.). In 1887 the subterranean ara Tarenti was discovered, and in 1890 fragmentary tables of
marble with inscriptions commemorating the Ludi Saeculares of Augustus
and Septimius Severus were found in the bed of the Tiber (Mommsen,
Eph. Epigr. viii 225 sqq.; Daremberg-Saglio, iv 990 sqq.).
computata ratione temporum: the chronology of the Ludi Saeculares
(Tarentini) is very obscure and depends mainly on statements in the De
die natali of Censorinus (238 A.D.). Dio (liv 18) says that the celebration
by Augustus was the fifth, and Censorinus (17, 8) mentions four earlier
in 449, 348, 249, 149 (146) в.с. The saeculum was reckoned as 100 or
110 years, the latter estimate being connected with the Greek belief that
a new cycle, a παλιγγενεσία, began after four periods of 110 years. The
Quindecimviri adopted the period of 110 years, and when Augustus (who
was chief Quindecimvir) wished to celebrate the games in 17 B.C., the
Quindecimviri invented records of previous celebrations in 456, 346, 236,
126 в.с. Claudius held the Ludi in 47 A.D., the 800th year from the
foundation of Rome, and said that Augustus had been premature: Claud. 21,
Fecit et saeculares, quasi anticipatos ab Augusto nec legitimo tempori
reservatos, quamvis ipse (Claudius) in historiis suis prodat, intermissos eos
Augustum multo post diligentissime annorum ratione subducta in ordinem
redegisse. At this celebration the summons of the herald to behold games:
"quos nec spectasset quisquam nec spectaturus esset'" caused much amusement, as many were still alive who had seen them under Augustus.
Domitian, though professing to follow the calculation of Augustus and
the period of 110 years, was six years in advance in holding them in
88 A.D. Subsequent celebrations were (1) by Antoninus Pius in 147, the
900th year from the foundation of Rome; (2) by Septimius Severus in 204,
after two intervals of 110 years from the Ludi of Augustus in 17 в.с.;
(3) by the emperor Philippus in 247, the 1000th year of Rome.
Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 385 sqq.
See
centum missus: the chariot race (missus, ἆθλον, ἅμιλλα) was usually
seven laps (curricula, spatia) round the metae at either end of the arena,
the finishing-point being a chalk line (creta, calx).
The total distance
traversed was about 9 kilometres, and Friedlaender (in Marquardt, Staatsv..
iii² 515) calculates that the number of races per hour would average 3.
Dio (lix 7) says that in races held by Caligula in 37 A.D. there were 20 on
the first day and 24 on the second, whereas 12 was the biggest number
previously. From the time of Claudius and Nero the usual number seems
to have been 24, though there are instances of 30, 36, 40, and 48. It is
almost incredible that Domitian could have got through 100 missus in
one day, even by reducing the number of laps. Dio (lxxii 16) mentions
that Commodus got through 30 in 2 hours; but, as Friedl. says, the missus
must have been much shortened or held in a smaller circus. In our passage
Friedl. would read diebus for die, but in the Ludi Saeculares of Augustus
the Circenses only occupied one day. In fixing the number of races at
100 Domitian was probably influenced by the number of years in the
saeculum.
§ 4. quinquennale certamen: Nero, eager for glory as a poet, singer,
and player on the cithara, introduced Greek agones (ἀγῶνες, certamina) or
artistic competitions at Rome in 60 A.D.; cf. Ner. 12, 3, instituit et quinquennale certamen primus omnium Romae more Graeco triplex, musicum
(singing, instrumental music, poetry, oratory) gymnicum equestre, quod
appellavit Neronia. Apparently this was discontinued at Nero's death,
and in 86 A.D. Domitian, to celebrate his restoration of the temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus, founded a similar agon Capitolinus. The prizes were
oaken wreaths; cf. Mart. iv 54, 1, O cui Tarpeias licuit contingere quercus,
etc.: Juv. vi 387, an Capitolinam deberet Pollio quercum | sperare? The
contest in Gr. and Lat. declamation was soon abandoned; that in Gr. and
Lat. poetry became widely famed, and a poet's chief ambition was to be
crowned by the emperor's hand. Statius often (e.g. S. v 3, 225 sqq.)
laments his want of success with his Thebais.
coronarum: this reading of Stephanus for coronatorum is supported
by Ner. 22, 2, palmarum numerum ampliare, and is accepted by nearly all
subsequent editors. Ihm retains coronatorum, but it seems very doubtful
Latin.
et prosa oratione: et means "as well as in poetry." Both prosa
(= proversa "straightforward") oratio and prosa by itself are used by
Quintil. and other post-class. writers; Cic. has oratio soluta, opp. to vincula
numerorum. The praise of Jupiter Capitolinus was a stock theme in the
contests in eloquence at the agon Capitolinus (Quintil. iii 7, 4, laudes
Capitolini Iovis, perpetua sacri certaminis materia). Suetonius mentions
that Palfurius Sura had once received the prize (Dom. 13, 1).
citharoedos chorocitharistae psilocitharistae: the citharoedus sang to
the accompaniment of his cithara; the psilocitharista (-es) played without
singing; the chorocitharista played an accompaniment to a chorus (cf.
choraules). The form χοροκιθαριστής is not found in Greek, but χοροκιθαρεύς
occurs in inscriptions (C.I.G. 2758 F, 2759); ψιλοκιθαριστής is not found
outside inscriptions, but we have such expressions as ψιλὴ κιθάρισις καὶ
αὔλησις (Plat. Legg. 669 E), and ψιλή μουσική, instrumental music, opposed
to ἡ μετὰ μελῳδίας, accompanied by song (Aristot. Pol. viii 5, 11). Suetonius
is the only Lat. author cited as using chorocitharista and psilocitharista,
but citharoedus (κιθαρῳδός) is found frequently.
stadio: see c. 5.
cursu etiam virgines: cf. Dio lxvii 8, ἐποίησε δὲ καὶ θέαν (spectaculum)
πολυτελῆ, ἐν ᾗ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν ἐς ἱστορίαν ἐπίσημον παρελάβομεν, πλὴν ὅτι καὶ
παρθένοι τῷ δρομικῷ ἠγωνίσαντο. This innovation of Domitian's was soon discontinued. He may have been copying the Spartans (cf. Xen. de rep.
Lac. 1, 4; Eur. Androm. 595 sqq.; Propert. iii 14) or the famous races
between girls at the festival in honour of Hera at Olympia which are
described in Pausan. v 16, 2.
crepidatus: the pallium and crepidae were the distinctive Greek dress,
as opp. to the Roman toga and calcei; cf. Tib. 13, 1, redegit se, deposito
patrio habitu, ad pallium et crepidas. Caligula, besides the military boot
(caliga) from which he got his name, also wore cothurni and crepidae
(Calig. 52). Latin comedies with Greek themes and dresses were called
fabulae palliatae, while fábulae crepidatae denoted Latin tragedies of a
like kind.
purpurea toga Graecanica: Mommsen (Staatsr. i3 417 n.) explains
this as the vestis Graecula (C.I.L. vi 8552), the Greek festal attire which
the Roman emperors wore during their stay in Greek cities (e.g. Claudius
in Naples, Dio 1x 6, ἐν μὲν ταῖς τῆς μουσικῆς θεωρίαις ἱμάτιον καὶ κρηπίδας, ἐν δὲ
τῷ γυμνικῷ ἀγῶνι πορφυρίδα καὶ στέφανον χρυσοῦν ἐλάμβαve: Hadrian in Athens,
Dio lxix 16); also on festal occasions at Rome (e.g. Nero on his triumphal
entry into Rome after his victory at the Olympic games, Ner. 25, in veste
purpurea distinctaque stellis aureis chlamyde: Commodus in the Roman
theatre, Dio lxxii 17). The ἀγωνοθέται, or presidents at the Greek games,
wore a purple robe (πορφυρίς) and a golden crown, and so Domitian as
ἀγωνοθέτης at his agon Capitolinus conformed to the Greek usage. Suetonius
uses Graecanicus = "in the Greek fashion" (Varr. L.L., Plin. N.H., etc.)
only here; elsewhere always Graecus.
coronam cum effigie: an illustration of a similar crown with three
medallions inset is given in Daremberg-Saglio, i 1525, fig. 1986.
temples of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva were all on the Capitol.
The
assidentibus: they not only sat beside him but also acted as assessors
or judges of the contests along with him; cf. C.I.L. ix 2860, coronatus
est inter poetas Latinos omnibus sententiis iudicum. In Herodian i 9, 2
the emperor Commodus at the Capitoline contests is described as θεατὴς καὶ
ἀθλοθέτης σὺν τοῖς λοιποῖς ἱερεῦσιν.
Diali sacerdote: the flamen Dialis attached to Jupiter (Diespiter) was
one of the three flamines maiores (the other two were the Martialis and
Quirinalis). The office, which lasted for life, was of great dignity but
involved many disabilities. The Dialis had a seat in the senate, was
preceded by a lictor, etc., but he was forbidden e.g. to mount on horseback, to be absent from Rome, or to swear an oath (sometimes, to enable
him to hold a magistracy, his colleague took the oath for him; Liv. xxxi
50). Candidates for the office were few, and it was in abeyance from 87
to 11 B.C. when Augustus restored it (Aug. 31, 4). See Marquardt,
Staatsv. iii² 328 sqq. The flamen Dialis sat beside Domitian at these contests, as the emperor was the earthly representative of Jove.
collegio Flavialium: the Flaviales were the priests who had charge of
the worship of the deified Flavian emperors, Vespasian and Titus. Such
worship began with the appointment of the Augustales (sodales, sacerdotes,
25 in number) by Tiberius in honour of Augustus and the Julian gens (see
on Galb. 8, 1). Besides the title Flaviales we also find in inscriptions
Flaviales Titiales, Titiales Flaviales, or simply Titiales; Titus, as the most
popular of the Flavian emperors, giving his name to the priesthood of
the gens. Other similar collegia were the Claudiales, Hadrianales,
Antoniniani (Ant. Pius), Aureliani (M. Aurelius), and lastly Alexandriani
(Alexander Severus).
nisi quod: see on Vitell. 7, 1.
Albano: the estate and villa, which may have originally belonged
to Pompey, at the foot of the Mons Albanus in Latium was a favourite
resort of the earlier emperors and was developed by Domitian into a
walled area including a palatial residence, baths, theatre, amphitheatre,
camp for the praetorians, etc. It became the notorious arx Albana of
which Tacitus (Agr. 45) and Juvenal (iv 145) speak with such bitterness.
Dio mentions the "Albanum" of Domitian and says (lxvii 1): τοῦτο τὸ
χωρίον ὑπὸ τὸ ὄρος τὸ ᾿Αλβανόν, ἀφ᾽ οὗπερ οὕτως ὠνομάσθη, ὂν ὥσπερ τινα ἀκρόπολιν
ἐξείλετο.
Quinquatria: the more usual form is Quinquatrus (pl.), originally a
festival of Mars on the 19th of March (five days after the Ides, whence
the name according to Varr. L.L. vi 14), but when the temple of Minerva
on the Aventine was dedicated on that day, the festival ceased to be
purely military and was celebrated by various arts and trades in honour
of their patroness Minerva. From 168 B.C. it lasted from the 19th to the
23rd of March and the name came to be misunderstood as the "five-day"
festival (cf. Ov. Fast. iii 809-834). It was a holiday time in schools
(Juv. x 115, with Mayor's note). Augustus on one occasion spent every
day of the Quinquatrus at the gaming-table (Aug. 71, 3); Nero, when
trying to compass the death of his mother Agrippina, invited her to Baiae
to celebrate the Quinquatrus with him (Ner. 34, 2; Oth. 3, 1, n.).
Minervae: cf. Dio lxvii 1, θεῶν μὲν γὰρ τὴν ᾿Αθηνῶν ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ἤγαλλε,
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ τὰ Παναθήναια (= Quinquatria) μεγάλως ἑώρταζε, καὶ ἐν αὐτοῖς
ἀγῶνας καὶ ποιητῶν καὶ λογογράφων, μονομάχων (gladiatorum) τε κατ' ἔτος, ὡς
εἰπεῖν, ἐν τῷ ᾿Αλβανῷ ἐποίει. Domitian worshipped Minerva with superstitious
veneration (superstitiose colebat, c. 15, 3); he regarded himself as her
especial favourite, and is said to have even claimed to be her son (Philostr.
vit. Apollon. vii 24). Quintilian (x 1, 91) speaks of her as the familiare
numen of Domitian; cf. Mart. viii 1, 4, Pallas Caesariana; ix 3, 10:
Stat. S. i 1, 5; iv 1, 22. He erected temples to her at Rome including
that in the Forum Transitorium (begun by Dom. and completed by Nerva,
see Dom. 5), and that to Minerva Chalcidica in the Campus Martius. Her
image appears on many of his coins. He gave the title of Prima Minervia
to a new legion enrolled by him.
magisterio: used of the directorship of a cult, the presidency of a
religious body, as in Calig. 22, 3 (of Caligula's own worship), magisteria
sacerdotii ditissimus quisque, et ambitione et licitatione maxima, vicibus
comparabant; cf. Capitolin. M. Anton. Philos. 4, fuit in eo sacerdotio (i.e.
the Salii) et praesul et vates et magister et multos inauguravit atque
exauguravit nemine praeeunte quod ipse carmina cuncta didicisset.
venationes: Juvenal (iv 99) mentions these as held at the arx Albana
of Domitian: profuit ergo nihil misero quod comminus ursos | figebat
Numidas, Albana nudus harena | venator. Suetonius refers to them again
in c. 19.
poetarum certamina: it was at this Alban festival that Statius three
times won the golden olive-crown, though he was unsuccessful at the agon
Capitolinus; cf. Silv. iv 2, 63 (describing a banquet with Domitian), qua
mihi felices epulas mensaeque dedisti | sacra tuae, talis longo post tempore
venit | lux mihi, Troianae qualis sub collibus Albae, | cum modo Germanas
ācies, modo Daca sonantem | proelia Palladio tua me manus induit auro.
Martial mentions the golden olive-crown: iv 1, 5, hic (i.e. Domitian) colat
Albano Tritonida (= Minervam) multus in auro: ix 23, 1, O cui virgineo
(= Palladio) flavescere contigit auro, etc.: ix 24, 5, non solam tribuit
Pallas tibi, Care, coronam. See on Vesp. 19, 1, coronas aureas.
§5. congiarium: see on Vesp. 18.
nummorum trecenorum: this was the normal amount given in the
1st cent. A.D. by various emperors: Tiberius, Caligula (twice), Claudius,
Vespasian, Nerva. Augustus gave five congiaria, one being 300 sesterces;
cf. Aug. 41, 2, congiaria populo frequenter dedit, sed diversae fere summae:
modo quadringenos, modo trecenos, nonnunquam ducenos quinquagenosque
The total amount
nummos. Nero gave 400 sesterces (Ner. 10, 1).
distributed at each of the three congiaria of Domitian was 60,000,000
sesterces (Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 138).
ter dedit: the first two congiaria may have been given at the triumphs
over the Chatti and Dacians in 83 and 89; see c. 6, 1. The third was
given in 93 to celebrate the victory over the Sarmatians; cf. Mart. viii 15,
Dum nova Pannonici numeratur gloria belli, | omnis et ad reducem dum
litat ara Iovem, | dat populus, dat gratus eques, dat tura senatus, | et
ditant Latias tertia dona tribus.
epulum: this presumably is the same banquet as that mentioned in
c. 13, 1, in amphitheatro epuli die. Janssen would identify it with that
given by Domitian in the amphitheatre on the Kalends of December, which
is so vividly described in Stat. Silv. i 6, and also with those mentioned in
Dio lxvii 4, τοῖς τε θεωμένοις συχνὰ διὰ τῶν σφαιρίων (= tesserarum) ἐδίδου, καί
ποτε καὶ ἐδείπνισεν αὐτοὺς κατὰ χώραν καθημένους: Mart. v 49, 8, Hic error
tibi profuit Decembri, | tum, cum prandia misit Imperator, | cum panariolis
tribus redisti: viii 50, 7, Vescitur omnis eques tecum populusque patresque, |
et capit ambrosias cum duce Roma dapes. Friedlaender explains Mart. v
49 as referring to the banquet (prob. in 88) described by Statius, but
thinks that in viii 50 Martial refers to another banquet (prob. in Jan. 93)
given by Dom. after his victory over the Sarmatians. Vollmer (on Stat.
l.c.) reasonably regards it as purely arbitrary to identify the banquet
described by Statius with any of those mentioned elsewhere. Janssen
seems to overlook the chronological difficulty of identifying the banquet
described by Statius as given on Dec. 1 with that mentioned by Suetonius
as given at the Septimontium on Dec. 11 (or the following days); another
difficulty in this identification is noticed on c. 13, 1.
Septimontiali sacro, cum quidem: this is a correction by Iac.
Gronovius of sacrorum quidem. Some of the "codices deteriores" have
sacro quidem (read by Roth and Preud'homme) and sacrorum quidem die
(read by Sabellicus and most of the early editors). Among the emendations
which have been proposed are:-Sept. sacro quondam (Torrentius and
Bentley): Sept. sacro senatui quidem (Politian, followed by Baumg.-Cr.) :
Sept. sacro primoque die (Oudendorp): Sept. sacro, primo quidem die
(Ernesti). All readings except that of Gronovius involve putting a fuil
stop after epulum and treating the following sentence as an independent
statement. Ihm regards the correction of Gronovius as probable, and it
is defended by Alexander (op. cit. 27 sqq.) and read by Janssen and Rolfe.
The Septimontium or Septimontiale sacrum was celebrated on Dec. 11.
The seven montes were the three divisions of the Palatine, viz. Palatium,
Cermalus, Velia; the three of the Esquiline, viz. Mons Oppius, Mons
Cispius, and the Fagutal; and the Subura (on this and the correction
"Sucusa" see Platner-Ashby, Topogr. Dict. Rome). Originally the festival
ranked among sacra popularia or publica, but with the extension of Rome
it was considered as one of the feriae privatae celebrated by the montani,
and not by the pagani who inhabited what was at first the farm-land
round Rome. On the day of the Septimontium there was a sacrifice
(palatuar) on the Palatine by the flamen Palatualis, and no vehicles drawn
by beasts of burden were allowed in the old city (Plut. Quaest. Rom. 69).
See Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 190; Mommsen, Staatsr. iii³ 113. In Domitian's
time apparently the Septimontium must have lasted for more than one
day, part of the celebration consisting of gladiatorial displays as in the
case of the Quinquatria, etc.
panariis: cf. Calig. 18, 2, panaria cum obsonio viritim divisit: Stat.
S. i 6, 27 (describing the imperial servants distributing the food in the
amphitheatre), Ecce autem caveas subit per omnes | insignis specie, decora
cultu | plebes altera non minor sedente. | Hi panaria candidasque mappas |
subvectant epulasque lautiores, | illi marcida vina largiuntur, etc. panarium
(panis), lit. "bread-basket," is used in Plin. Ep. i 6, 3 for a "luncheonbasket"; Martial (v 49, 10) has the diminutive panariola for the small
baskets (sportellae) of food provided for the people by Domitian.
sportellis: like sportula (see on c. 7, 1), sportella was a dim. from
sporta (σπυρίς, σπείρω) a plaited basket; it occurs also in Cic. Fam. ix 20,
Petron. Satyr. 40.
obsonio: obsonium (ὀψώνιον) denoted any cooked food eaten in addition
to bread, but more especially fish (Marquardt, Privatl.2 432); it often
2 м
implies "dainties," e.g. Vitell. 10, 12, inter profusissimos obsoniorum
apparatus: Iul. 43, 2, legem praecipue sumptuariam exercuit dispositis circa
macellum custodibus, qui obsonia contra vetitum proposita retinerent.
initium vescendi primus fecit: cf. Stat. S. i 6, 42, Una vescitur omnis
ordo mensa, | parvi, femina, plebs, eques, senatus: | libertas reverentiam
remisit. Et tu quin etiam (quis hoc vacare, | quis promittere possit hoc
deorum?) | nobiscum socias dapes inisti. | Iam se, quisquis is est, inops
beatus | convivam ducis esse gloriatur. For the pleonasm cf. Liv. vi 12, 10,
primum initium certaminis: iii 54, 9, prima initia inchoastis libertatis.
omne genus: adverbial acc., see on Tit. 7, 3.
rerum missilia sparsit: cf. Calig. 18, 2, sparsit missilia variarum
rerum: Ner. 11, 2, sparsa et populo missilia omnium rerum per omnes
dies: singula cotidie milia avium cuiusque generis, multiplex penus,
tesserae frumentariae, vestis, aurum, argentum, gemmae, margaritae,
tabulae pictae, mancipia, iumenta, atque etiam mansuetae ferae, novissime
naves, insulae ("apartment houses''), agri. Sometimes the gifts themselves, at other times tesserae entitling the recipients to gifts or amusements, were scattered among the people. The first sparsio missilium that
can be dated was that of Agrippa in 33 B.C., when he rained tesserae
upon the heads of the people in the theatre and provided vast quantities
of wares of all kinds to be scrambled for (Dio xlix 43). Statius (S. i 6,
66) mentions Domitian's dives sparsio at the feast in the amphitheatre.
popularia: = sedes populi in theatro (amphitheatro); so equestria (sc.
loca or sedilia) in Calig. 26, 4. This substantival use seems peculiar to
Suetonius; cf. Claud. 25, 4, where the German envoys, having been shown
to the seats of the common people in the theatre (in popularia deducti),
insisted on sitting with the senate in the orchestra, where the Parthian
and Armenian envoys were sitting. For the position of the popularia in
the amphitheatre see below on cuneos.
tesseras: such tokens, billets, or tallies were used for various purposes;
e.g. the tesseraę frumentariae (Aug. 40, 2; Ner. 11, 2) and tesserae nummariae (Aug. 41, 2) for which the poorer classes could get corn or money.
Dio (lxi 18, lxvi 25) describes those distributed by Nero and Titus at their
sparsiones as small wooden balls inscribed with what they could be
exchanged for. The shape and material of the tesserae scattered on such
occasions varied; see Daremberg-Saglio, iii 1936, for illustrations of those
in the form of fish, animals, etc., with a number marked on them. Sometimes they were shaped like coins and were called nomismata; cf. Mart. viii
78, 9, nunc veniunt subitis lasciva nomismata nimbis, | nunc dat spectatas
tessera larga feras.
cuneos: "wedges" or "blocks" of seats. In the amphitheatre the
senators occupied seats on the podium or terrace on the top of the wall
surrounding the arena. Each of the rising divisions of seats (gradus)
above the podium was called a maenianum; the equites sat in the 14 rows
of the first maenianum; in the second were the popularia or seats of the
populus; in the third were wooden benches for the pullati or lower classes.
The lines of seats in the maeniana were divided into blocks (cunei) by
short flights of stairs, to facilitate access. The podium was separated
from the seats of the equites by a wall (balteus) and a passage or
promenade (praecinctio), and each maenianum was separated from that
above it in the same way.
pronuntiavit: = publice promisit; cf. Galb. 16, 1.
CHAPTER 5.
plurima et amplissima opera: Eutrop. vii 23, Romae quoque multa
opera fecit: in his Capitolium, et Forum transitorium, Odeum, Divorum
porticus, Iseum, Serapeum, ac stadium: Aur. Vict. Caes. 11, 4, multaque
opera inchoata per patrem, vel fratris studio, atque in primis Capitolium
absolvit: Epit. 11, 3, Romae multa aedificia vel coepta vel a fundamentis
construxit: Oros. vii 10, 2, plurimas urbis aedes destructis populi Romani
rebus exstruxit. Martial (ix 3) declares that Olympus would be bankrupt
if the gods tried to pay their debt to Domitian for his magnificent temples;
Jove could not even pay a paltry composition. According to Plutarch
(Poplic. 15) building was merely a disease with Domitian, and the line of
Epicharmus on the ἄσωτος or spendthrift “ Οὐ φιλάνθρωπος τύ γ᾽ ἐσσ᾽· ἔχεις
νόσον· χαίρεις διδούς." might be applied to Domitian in some such way as
this: “ Οὐκ εὐσεβὴς οὐδὲ φιλότιμος τύ γ᾽ ἐσσί· ἔχεις νόσον· χαίρεις οἰκοδομῶν,
ὥσπερ ὁ Μίδας ἐκεῖνος ἅπαντά σοι χρυσᾶ καὶ λίθινα βουλόμενος γίνεσθαι.”
incendio: in 80 A.D., under Titus; see Tit. 8, 3.
Capitolium: the early history of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus
is given on Vitell. 15, 33; for its form and splendour as restored by
Domitian see Jordan Topogr. Rom i 2, 86 sqq. and the illustrations in
Daremberg-Saglio i 903 sqq. The doors were plated with gold, and it was
roofed with gilt tiles. Plutarch (l.c.) says that the gilding alone cost
more than 12,000 talents (about £2,400,000), and he adds the interesting
detail that the columns of Pentelic marble were excellently proportioned
when he saw them at Athens, but that when they were cut and polished
anew at Rome their beauty was impaired by their appearing too slender
for their height.
rursus arserat: Plut. (l.c.), ἅμα τῷ τελευτῆσαι Οὐεσπασιανόν, ἐνεπρήσθη τὸ
Καπιτώλιον. ὁ δὲ τέταρτος οὗτος νεὼς ὑπὸ Δομιτιανοῦ καὶ συνετελέσθη καὶ καθιερώθη.
After the temple had been burned down in 69 A.D. (see Vitell. 15, 3) it
was restored by Vespasian (Vesp. 8, 5), and Plut. says that Vespasian was
luckier than Sulla who died before his temple to Jupiter Capitolinus was
dedicated, whereas Vespasian died before his was destroyed, as it was by
fire immediately after his death. From the Acta Arvalia (C.I.L. vi 2059,
Newton 159) we learn that on Dec. 7, 80 A.D. the Fratres Arvales (who
had to meet in the adjoining temple of Ops since that of Jupiter Capitolinus
had been burned) offered their vows for the restoration and dedication of
the temple by Titus: M. Tittio Frugi, T. Vinicio Iuliano cos., vii Idus
Decembr., in Capitolio in aedem Opis sacerdotes convenerunt ad vota
nuncupando ad restitutionem et dedicationem Capitoli ab Imp. T. Caesare
Vespasiano Aug.
sub titulo tantum suo: in marked contrast to his father Vespasian,
who inscribed on the buildings which he restored merely the names of the
original builders and not his own; Dio lxvi 10 (Zonar. xi 17), τὰ τεμένη
καὶ τὰ δημόσια ἔργα τὰ πεπονηκότα ἀνελάμβανε, καὶ τὰ ἤδη ἐφθαρμένα ἐπανεσκεύαζε,
καὶ συντελουμένοις αὐτοῖς οὐ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἐπέγραφεν ὄνομα, ἀλλὰ τὸ τῶν πρώτως
δομησαμένων.
aedem Custodi Iovi: as a thankoffering for his escape from the
Capitol when it was stormed by the Vitellians he built in Vespasian's reign a
:
2 м 2
small shrine (sacellum) to Jupiter Conservator on the site of the dwelling
of the aedituus who had sheltered him (see on c. 1, 2), and when he became emperor he also consecrated a vast temple to Jupiter Custos, with an
effigy of himself in the arms (or on the lap) of the god; Tac. H. iii 74,
mox imperium adeptus Iovi Custodi templum ingens seque in sinu dei
sacravit. There are coins of Domitian (from 84 A.D. on) inscribed Iovi
Conservatori, and others (from 86 on) inscribed Iovi Custodi (Eckhel, vi
379, 393; Cohen, i² 430, 432).
forum Nervae: Vespasian's Temple of Peace (Vesp. 9, 1) and the area
surrounding it lay to the S.E. of the Forum Augusti, separated from it by
the street known as the Argiletum, which ran from the Subura to the Forum
Romanum. This portion of the Argiletum was converted by Domitian into
a “forum” called (a) forum Nervae, as it was completed and dedicated
by Nerva in 98; (b) forum Transitorium (or Pervium), on account of the
highway which ran through it; (c) forum Palladium, from the temple of
Minerva built in it; cf. Mart. i 2, 8, Limina post Pacis Palladiumque
forum.
Flaviae templum gentis: on the site of the house where he was born;
see on c. 1, 1.
stadium: Domitian constructed a stadium for foot-races and other
athletic contests to the W. of the Thermae of Nero in the Campus Martius,
near the Pantheon. It held 15,000 spectators, and must have been finished
before 86 A.D. if it is the stadium mentioned in c. 4, 4. After the burning
of the Colosseum in the reign of Macrinus (217-18 A.D.) the stadium was
used for some years for the shows of the amphitheatre (Dio lxxviii 25). It
was restored by Alexander Severus (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 24).
In the
middle of the 4th cent. Ammianus (xvi 10, 14) mentions it and the Odeum
among the “decora urbis aeternae.” For its subsequent history and
remains see Jordan-Huelsen, Topogr. Rom i 3, 592 sqq. Julius Caesar had
erected a temporary stadium for athletic contests at his triumph: Iul. 39, 3,
stadio ad tempus exstructo regione Marti Campi; so too Augustus: Aug.
43, 1, (edidit) athletas quoque exstructis in campo Martio sedilibus ligneis.
The stadium connected with the gymnasium of Nero (Ner. 12, 3) which
was destroyed by lightning in 62 was probably on the same site as that
of Domitian.
Odium: this Odium (1) or Odeum (ē) was also in the Campus Martius
between the stadium and the trigarium. It was a roofed theatre for
musical performances, and held an audience of 5000.
The name was
borrowed from the Gr. ᾠδεῖον which denoted a building for the same
purpose, such as that of Pericles at Athens. Dio (lxix 4) mentions among
the works of Trajan an ᾠδεῖον which seems to have been a restoration of
that of Domitian.
naumachiam: for this new basin or lake for the representation of
sea-fights see on c. 4, 2, Edidit navales pugnas
effosso iuxta Tiberim
lacu.
Maximus Circus: see on c. 4, 1.
..
deustis lateribus: the date of this fire is unknown, and it is not
mentioned by any other author. Burn (Rome and the Campagna c. xii)
assumes that it occurred in Domitian's reign and that Domitian rebuilt
the whole Circus with stone taken from his Naumachia. More probably
it was Trajan who used the stone when he restored the Circus with great
magnificence; cf. Plin. Pan. 51, Immensum latus Circi templorum pulchritudinem provocat: digna populo victore gentium sedes, nec minus ipsa visenda
quam quae ex illa spectabuntur, etc.: Dio lxviii 7, οὕτως γάρ που καὶ
μεγαλόφρων καὶ μεγαλογνώμων ἔφυ ὥστε τῷ ἱπποδρόμῳ ἐπιγράψαι ὅτι ἐξαρκοῦντα
αὐτὸν τῷ τῶν Ῥωμαίων δήμῳ ἐποίησεν, ἐπειδὴ διαφθαρέντα πῃ καὶ μείζω καὶ
περικαλλέστερον ἐξειργάσατο.
CHAPTER 6.
Chattos: a tribe dwelling about the Taunus mts., their territory
corresponding to the mod. Hesse and part of Bavaria. They had been
defeated by Drusus in 11 B.с., by Germanicus in 14 A.D., and again in
the reign of Claudius (50 A.D.). The occasion of Domitian's expedition
against them in 83 is uncertain (see Vollmer, Introd. to Stat. Silv., p. 44).
There are vague expressions in Frontin. Strateg. i 1, 8, cum Germanos qui
in armis erant vellet opprimere: Stat. S. i 4, 89, Rhenumque rebellem.
Dio (lxvii 5) says the object was to aid the Cherusci, a tribe friendly to
Rome, whose king had been driven out by the Chatti. Domitian marched
north, nominally to hold a census of the two Gauls. Frontinus (ex-governor
of Britain, who served in this campaign) says that he adopted this pretext
lest news of his coming should stir the Germans to a bigger rising
(Strateg. i 1, 8). Frontinus also praises the generalship of Domitian, e.g.
his accustoming his cavalry to fight on foot when the Chatti took to the
forests, and his establishing 120 miles of limites (ii 3, 23; ii, 7; i 3, 10).
No great victory is recorded, and the war seems to have ended by the
granting of a treaty to the Chatti (Stat. S. iii 3, 168, victis parcentia
foedera Chattis). Domitian celebrated a triumph, assumed the title
"Germanicus," let the consulship for 10 successive years be decreed to
him, took the censorship for life, and wore the toga triumphalis as often
as he entered the senate (Dio lxvii 4).
His achievement, though lauded
by Statius (S. i 1, 27, etc.) and Martial (i 4, 3; ii 2, 3; ix 1, 3), is belittled and ridiculed by hostile writers; e.g. Tac. Germ. 37, Germani
triumphati magis quam victi sunt; Tac. Agr. 39; Plin. Pan. 16.
(lxvii 4) says that he never even saw the foe: ἐκστρατεύσας εἰς τὴν Γερμανίαν,
καὶ μηδ᾽ ἑορακώς που πόλεμον, ἐπανῆκε. Modern historians connect Domitian's
campaign with a new plan of frontier defence, the "Limes Germanicus,"
a rampart of earth guarded at intervals by forts protecting the Roman
possessions in the neighbourhood of the Rhine.
This was begun by
Vespasian, and Domitian annexed the territory of the Taunus mts. to the
province of Upper Germany and continued the line of defence between the
Moenus (Main) and the Nicer (Neckar), so as to connect the Moenus and
the Rhine. See Bury, Stud. Rom. Emp. 403 sqq.; Mommsen, Prov. Rom.
Emp. i 150 sqq.; Weynand, in Pauly-Wissowa vi 2556 sqq.; Gsell, op. cit.
193 sqq. The most recent account of the Roman frontier fortifications
will be found in Henderson's Five Roman Emperors, cc. v and vi.
..
Dio
Sarmatas: the Sarmatae or Sauromatae dwelt from the Vistula to
the Don, in Poland and Russia. Domitian's punitive expedition against
them lasted 8 months from May 92 to Jan. 93 (Gsell, p. 226). It is not
mentioned by any historian except Eutropius (vii 23, 4) who, as usual,
follows Suetonius: Expeditiones quattuor habuit, unum adversum Sarmatas,
alterum adversum Cattos, duas adversum Dacos. De Dacis Cattisque
duplicem triumphum egit, de Sarmatis solam lauream usurpavit. Multas
tamen calamitates isdem bellis passus est; nam in Sarmatia legio eius cum
duce interfecta est, et a Dacis Oppius Sabinus consularis et Cornelius
Fuscus praefectus praetorio cum magnis exercitibus occisi sunt. Martial
frequently refers to this Sarmatian expedition; e.g. in vii 1 and 2 he
mentions a lorica, or cuirass, made of boars' hoofs (probably Sarmatian
workmanship, see Friedl.), which was taken from a temple of Minerva
at Rome and sent out to be worn by the emperor; in vii 80 he says that
peace has been established: Quatenus Odrysios iam pax Romana triones |
temperat et tetricae conticuere tubae, etc. Statius also lauds Domitian's
victory (S. iii 3, 167 sqq.; iv 3, 153; 7, 49).
legione cum legato simul caesa: this legion was probably v Alaudae
(Parker, Rom. Leg. p. 110; see on Vesp. 8, 2); it has also been identified
with xxi Rapax, which is not mentioned after the time of Domitian
(Schilling, De leg. Rom. i Minervia et xxx Ulpia, p. 24).
in Dacos duas: the chronology and history of Domitian's two
campaigns against the Dacians, whose territory included Roumania, are
obscure (see Vollmer, 48 sqq.; Brandis, in Pauly-Wissowa iv 2248;
Henderson, op. cit. 160 sqq.). Under their king Decebalus (or Diurpaneus)
the Dacians invaded Moesia in the winter of 85 and defeated and slew
Oppius Sabinus, the Roman legatus there. After the death of Sabinus the
emperor took the field and marched to the Danube, but entrusted the
conduct of the war to Cornelius Fuscus, the praetorian prefect.
Fuscus
drove the Dacians out of Moesia, and it was then, apparently, that Domitian
returned to Rome and celebrated a triumph (see on c. 13, 3; cf. Stat. S. iii
3, 118, сит prima truces amentia Dacos | impulit et magno gens est
damnata triumpho). Fuscus next threw a bridge of boats across the
Danube and penetrated into Dacia, but he met with a disastrous defeat
and was himself slain. His successor Julianus again invaded Dacia and
gained a great victory at Tapae in 89. About this time Domitian, after
the suppression of the revolt of L. Antonius in Upper Germany, had
marched from the Rhine to Pannonia to punish the Marcomani and Quadi
for not sending the aid promised to Fuscus against the Dacians; but he
was defeated by them with the aid of the adjoining Sarmatian Iazyges,
and so was ready to grant terms of peace when Decebalus sent envoys to
Pannonia. Domitian placed a diadem on the head of Diegis, brother of
Decebalus, who was the leader of the embassy, as a token that Dacia's
king was now a vassal of Rome. After his return to Rome in '89 Domitian
celebrated a magnificent triumph (see below). The title "Dacicus," which
is only used by Martial in the dedicatory letter to Bk. viii, is a mere
piece of flattery and not an official title (Friedl. ad loc.).
Oppio Sabino consulari: he was consul ordinarius in the early months
of 84 A.D. along with the emperor Domitian, who was consul then for the
tenth time (C.I.L. xiv 245, Dessau 6126).
Cornelio Fusco: appointed procurator of Pannonia by Galba in 69
(Тас. Н. ii 86). He warmly supported the cause of Vespasian, and next
to Antonius Primus had most influence at the councils of Vespasian 's
generals (H. iii 4). He was made commander of the fleet at Ravenna
(H. iii 12), and was voted the insignia praetoria by the senate in Dec. 69
after the victory of the Flavians (H. iv 4). Juvenal (iv 111) mentions
him as one of the consilium hastily summoned to the arx Albana by
Domitian: Et qui vulturibus servabat viscera Dacis | Fuscus, marmorea
meditatus proelia villa. Martial (vi 76) refers to his position as praetorian
prefect charged with Domitian's safety, and talks of his victorious shade
haunting a vassal grove in vanquished Dacia: Ille sacri lateris custos
Martisque togati, | credita cui summi castra fuere ducis, | hic situs est Fuscus.
Licet hoc, Fortuna, fateri: | non timet hostiles iam lapis iste minas; |
grande iugum domita Dacus cervice recepit | et famulum victrix possidet
umbra nemus. For an appreciation of his military ability see Davies,
J.R.S. x 19; Henderson, op. cit. 162.
praefecto cohortium praetorianarum: see on Tit. 4, 2.
varia proelia: varia = vario eventu; cf. Tac. H. v 10, legatum varia
proelia ac saepius adversa excepere. For the disasters to Domitian's armies
cf. Eutrop. vii 23, 4 (quoted above on “Sarmatas"): Tac. Agr. 41, tot
exercitus in Moesia Daciaque et Germania et Pannonia temeritate aut per
ignaviam ducum amissi, tot militares viri cum totis cohortibus expugnati
et capti: Oros. vii 10, 3, Bellum adversum Germanos et Dacos per legatos
gessit pari reipublicae pernicie, cum et in urbe ipse senatum populumque
laniaret et foris male circumactum exercitum adsidua hostes caede conficerent. Nam quanta fuerint Diurpanei, Dacorum regis, cum Fusco duce
proelia, quantaeque Romanorum clades, longo textu evolverem, nisi Cornelius
Tacitus, qui hanc historiam diligentissime contexuit, de reticendo interfectorum numero et Sallustium Crispum et alios auctores quam plurimos
sanxisse et se ipsum idem potissimum elegisse dixisset. Domitianus tamen
pravissima elatus iactantia sub nomine superatorum hostium de exstinctis
legionibus triumphavit. The defeats of Sabinus and Fuscus are also
mentioned in Iordan. Get. xiii 76. Dio (lxvii 6) says that Domitian claimed
the credit of all the successes, none of which was due to him, and blamed
others for reverses incurred in consequence of orders issued by him.
..
duplicem triumphum egit: usually explained as meaning that in 89
Domitian celebrated at the same time a double triumph over the Chatti
who had supported L. Antonius in his revolt (see § 2) and over the Dacians,
this being the triumph dated between Oct. 1, 89 and Sept. 30, 90 by Euseb.-
Hieron., p. 161 Schoene, Domitianus de Dacis et Germanis triumphavit.
Brandis, however, seems right in taking the words to mean that Domitian
twice celebrated a triumph over each of the two: over the Chatti in 83
and 89, and over the Dacians in 86 and 89. Suetonius often uses duplex
in the sense of duo; e.g. Vesp. 4, 2, d. sacerdotium: Ner. 1, 2, d. censura:
Aug. 16, 1, d. naufragium: Aug. 13, 1, bellum duplici proelio transegit,
quorum priore vix.. evaserat. On this view, which is strongly supported
by Janssen, the complete number of Domitian's triumphs is given here; the
two earlier ones (in 83 and 86) are referred to in c. 13, 3, post duos
triumphos transnominavit, where see notes. A colossal equestrian statue
of Domitian was set up in the Forum on his triumphal return in 89 (Stat.
S. i 1). The triumphal games were under the direction of L. Arruntius Stella
(S. i 2, 180), and the cost of the celebration was met by an exaction of
aurum coronarium from the provinces. Dio (lxvii 7) derides the triumphal
procession with its "spoils" supplied from the emperor's palace, and
asserts that the "peace" granted to the Dacians was in reality a humiliating
agreement on Domitian's part to pay a vast sum to Decebalus and to
furnish him with Roman artificers for civil and military purposes. Similarly
Pliny (Pan. 17) contrasts the sham victories of Domitian with the solid
successes of Trajan in his Dacian wars.
lauream Capitolino Iovi rettulit: cf. Ner. 13, 2, where Nero deposits
a laurel wreath in the Capitol (laurea in Capitolium lata) after Tiridates,
king of Armenia, appeared at Rome as a suppliant and had his diadem
restored by the emperor. It was part of the ceremony of a regular (iustus)
triumph that the triumphing general, when the procession reached the
temple of Capitoline Jove, should deposit in the lap of the god the laurel
branch which he bore in his hand and the laurel wreaths with which the
fasces were crowned; cf. Sil. Ital. xv 120, laurumque superbam | in gremio
Iovis excisis deponere Poenis. Furthermore, a laurel wreath was placed in
the lap of the god when news of a victory reached Rome; cf. Plin. N.H. xv
30, laurus.. in gremio Iovis Opt. Max. deponitur quoties laetitiam nova
victoria attulit. Sometimes the wreath was sent from the scene of the
victory; cf. Plin. Pan. 8, allata erat ex Pannonia laurea hanc imperator
Nerva in gremio Iovis collocarat. The poets refer to Domitian's waiving
his claim to a formal triumph over the Sarmatae; e.g. Mart. viii 15, 5, hos
quoque secretos ("suppressed'') memoravit Roma triumphos, | nec minor
ista tuae laurea pacis erat; ix 101, 19, Saepe recusatos parcus duxisse
triumphos | victor Hyperboreo nomen ab orbe tulit: Stat. S. iii 3, 171,
quae (clementia) modo Marcomanos post horrida bella vagosque | Sauromatas
Latio non est dignata triumpho: iv 1, 39, mille tropaea feres, tantum
permitte (i.e. "only accept'") triumphos: | restat Bactra novis, restat
Babylona tributis | frenari, nondum in gremio Iovis Indica laurus.
§ 2. bellum civile: this revolt of L. Antonius is described by Statius
as "civile nefas” (S. i 1, 80); in inscriptions it is called “bellum
Germanicum” (e.g. C.I.L. vi 1347, Dessau 1006).
L. Antonio: L. Antonius Saturninus was military commander in
Upper Germany, and at the end of 88 A.D., acting in concert with some of
the senate, he induced the two legions (xiv Gemina Martia Victrix and xxi
Rapax) in winter-quarters at Moguntiacum (Mainz) to proclaim him
Imperator. He provided himself with funds by seizing the savings of the
legionaries (see c. 7, 3). He was relying on the support of the Germans
beyond the Rhine, who had earlier taken part in the revolt of Civilis,
especially the Chatti and their allies the Usipi. L. Appius Maximus
Norbanus, who in all probability was military commander in Lower Germany
(see Henderson, op. cit. 111), promptly advanced against him and defeated
him in Jan. 89. Domitian had summoned Trajan to march from Spain
over the Pyrenees and Alps (Plin. Pan. 14), and had himself left Rome to
quell the rising before he heard of the victory of Norbanus, and after the
news he continued his march to the Rhine. The officers of the disaffected
legions were executed and many senators were put to death by Domitian.
Cf. Dio lxvii 11 (where Norbanus is praised for burning the captured
correspondence of Saturninus, to save his fellow conspirators): [Aur. Vict.]
Epit. 11, 9, his eius (Domitiani) saevitiis, ac maxime iniuria verborum, qua
scortum vocari dolebat, accensus Antonius, curans Germaniam superiorem,
imperium corripuit. Quo per Norbanum Appium acie strato, Domitianus
longe taetrior, in omne hominum genus, etiam in suos, ferarum more grassabatur. Martial (iv 11) says that Antonius Saturninus wished to emulate
M. Antonius the triumvir: Dum nimium vano tumefactus nomine gaudes, |
et Saturninum te, miser, esse pudet, | impia Parrhasia movisti bella sub
ursa, | qualia qui Phariae coniugis arma tulit, etc. Martial also praises the
loyalty of Norbanus, ix 84, Cum tua sacrilegos contra, Norbane, furores |
staret pro domino Caesare sancta fides, etc.
superioris Germaniae: see on Vitell. 7, 1.
resolutus: ''thawed," a poetical word; cf. Luc. i 219, madidis Euri
resolutae flatibus Alpes: Ov. Trist. iii 10, 13, nix iacet, et iactam ne sol
pluviaeque resolvant, | indurat Boreas perpetuamque facit.
siquidem: "inasmuch as," "since." Suet. uses siquidem (εἴ γε) twenty
times and always with the indic. The causal signification is found at
times in Cic. (Kühner-Stegmann, ii 427) and prevails, almost exclusively,
in post-Aug. writers. Trachmann (op. cit. p. 39) assumes that in our
passage siquidem expresses a doubt: “Suetonius iis, quae addita
'siquidem' particula adiecit, illud praesagium tanquam ex vano haustum
in dubium vocare videtur; but Suetonius is too firm a believer in presages
of every kind to throw any doubt on their reality.
clangores: the regular word for an eagle's screams; cf. Liv. i, 34, S,
aquila cum magno clangore volitans: Cic. carm. frg. 32, 14 (Baehrens),
Iovis satelles (i.e. aquila)
clangorem fundit vastum: Plin. N.H. x 6,
melanaëtos sola aquila sine clangore.
adeo vulgatum est: Plutarch (Aem. Paul. 25), describing the inexplicable way in which the report of the victory of Paulus over Perseus at
Pydna (168 B.C.) suddenly spread at Rome, gives earlier instances of such
strange happenings: (1) the defeat of the Crotoniats by the Locrians at
the Sagras in Bruttium (6 cent. B.C.) known to the Greeks at Olympia on
the same day; (2) the defeat of the Persian fleet by the Greeks at Mycale
in Lydia (479 B.с.) known to the Plataeans on the same day; (3) the defeat
of the Tarquins at Lake Regillus in Latium by the Romans (496 в.с.)
announced at Rome by two mysterious horsemen said to be Castor and
Pollux. He adds that all these stories are confirmed by what happened
in his own day with regard to the report at Rome of this defeat of
L. Antonius: Ὅτε γὰρ ᾿Αντώνιος ἀπέστη Δομετιανοῦ καὶ πολὺς πόλεμος ἀπὸ
Γερμανίας προσεδοκᾶτο, τῆς ῾Ρώμης ταραττομένης ἄφνω καὶ αὐτομάτως ὁ δῆμος ἐξ
αὑτοῦ φήμην ἀνέδωκε νίκης, καὶ τὴν ῾Ρώμην ἐπέδραμε λόγος αὐτόν τε τὸν ᾿Αντώνιον
ἀνῃρῆσθαι καὶ τοῦ σὺν αὐτῷ στρατεύματος ἡττημένου μηδὲν μέρος λελεῖφθαι.
Τοσαύτην δὲ λαμπρότητα καὶ ῥύμην ἡ πίστις ἔσχεν, ὥστε καὶ θῦσαι τῶν ἐν τέλει
πολλούς. Ζητουμένου δὲ τοῦ πρώτου φράσαντος, ὡς οὐδεὶς ἦν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ λόγος εἰς ἄλλον
· ἐξ ἄλλου διωκόμενος ἀνέφευγε, καὶ τέλος καταδὺς ὥσπερ εἰς πέλαγος ἀχανὲς τὸν
ἄπειρον ὄχλον ἐφάνη μηδεμίαν ἀρχὴν ἔχων βέβαιον, αὕτη μὲν ἡ φήμη ταχὺ τῆς
-πόλεως ἐξερρύη, πορευομένῳ δὲ τῷ Δομετιανῷ μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τὸν πόλεμον ἤδη καθ'
·ὁδὸν ἀγγελία καὶ γράμματα φράζοντα τὴν νίκην ἀπήντησεν. Ἡ δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ
·κατορθώματος (victoriae) ἡμέρα καὶ τῆς φήμης ἐγίνετο, ἐπὶ πλέον ἢ δισμυρίους
σταδίους τῶν τόπων διεστώτων. Ταῦτα μὲν οὐδεὶς ἀγνοεῖ τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς.
caput adportatum: Dio (lxvii 11) says that Domitian sent the heads
of Antonius and those executed as his accomplices to be exposed on
the Rostra at Rome.
multa in..
habui sane, non
CHAPTER 7.
usu novavit: for this constr. cf. Cic. Legg. iii 5, 12, nihil
modo multum, quod putarem novandum in legibus.
sportulas rectarum cenarum: under the early Empire clients, instead of being asked occasionally to a regular dinner (recta cena, see on
Vesp. 19, 1) by their patronus, received from him a portion of food
(sportula) as a daily reward for their attentions. These doles were carried
away in a small basket (sportula, see on sportellae, c. 4, 5); hence the
same name was given to the dole itself. Patrons soon found it more convenient to give in lieu of food a small sum of money (usually 100 quadrantes, less than a shilling). Nero, from motives of economy, substituted
sportulae for publicae cenae (Ner. 16, 2, adhibitus sumptibus modus;
publicae cenae ad sportulas redactae). A publica cena was not a dinner
given at state expense, but one provided either by a magistrate, or by the
emperor, or even by a private person in a public place (in publico), e.g.
the Forum, to which the people or part of the people were invited.
Domitian restored the publicae cenae and abolished the publicae sportulae,
and, presumably, every patron had to furnish a recta cena for his clients;
but the change was disliked by both patrons and clients, and the suppression
of the money sportula did not last more than three or four years. Martial
only mentions it in Bk. iii (published 87/88 A.D.); in his later Books the
money sportula has been restored. See Marquardt, Privatl.2 207 sqq.
gregum: restored by Beroaldus for grecum. The chariot-drivers
(aurigae, agitatores) of each factio formed a grex under the control of
the dominus factionis: cf. Ner. 22, 2, spectaculum multiplicatis missibus
("races") in serum protrahebatur, ne dominis quidem iam factionum
dignantibus nisi ad totius diei cursum greges ducere (i.e. they refused to
bring out their drivers at all unless there was to be a full day's racing).
factiones: companies of contractors who entered into an agreement
with the giver of the games (munerarius, editor spectaculorum) to provide
the chariots, horses, drivers, and all other requisites. Each factio had its
own distinctive colour which was worn by its charioteers and displayed on
its chariots. Everyone at Rome, from the emperor down, became a violent
partizan of one of the different colours.
aurati purpureique: Dio lxvii 4, τοῖς δὲ ἁρματηλάταις δύο γένη ἕτερα, τὸ
μὲν χρυσοῦν, τὸ δὲ πορφυροῦν ὀνομάσας, προσκατέστησε. These two new colours
soon completely disappeared. The "Purple" is once mentioned in Mart. xiv
55 (84/85 A.D.), Proficies nihil hoc, caedas licet usque, flagello, si tibi
purpureo de grege currit equus (this contemptuous reference shows that
the "Purple” found no favour with Domitian, though introduced by him).
The only other mention of the "Purple" is in C.I.L. vi 10062 (Dessau
5282): D. m. Epaphroditus agitator f(actionis) r(ussatae); vicit clxxviii
et ad purpureum liber (i.e. manumissus) vic. viii. Some identify ‘pannus
chelidonius'' in C.I.L. vi 10046 (Dessau 5313) with “pannus purpureus,”
but the reading is uncertain; see Friedl. in Marquardt Staatsv. iii² 518.
panni: pannus (a cloth, garment, or rag) was used specially for the
coloured tunic of the charioteer in the races; cf. Pliny, Ep. ix 6, Quo
magis miror tot milia virorum tam pueriliter identidem cupere currentes
equos, insistentes curribus homines videre. Si tamen aut velocitate
equorum aut hominum arte traherentur, esset ratio non nulla: nunc favent
panno, pannum amant, et si in ipso cursu medioque certamine hic color
illuc, ille huc transferatur, studium favorque transibit, et repente agitatores
illos, equos illos, quos procul noscitant, quorum clamitant nomina, relinquent: Juv. xi 198, Totam hodie Romam circus capit, et fragor aurem |
percutit, eventum ('success'') viridis quo colligo ("infer”) panni.
quattuor pristinas: White (albus), Red (russatus, russeus), Green
(viridis or prasinus, from πράσον a leek), Blue (venetus, see Vitell. 7, 1);
cf. Sidon. carm. xxiii 323, micant colores | albus vel venetus virens rubensque. White and Red were the original colours; Tertull. Spect. 9, ab initio
duo soli fuerunt, albus et russeus. Pliny (N.H. vii 186) quotes from the
acta a notice of the death of one Felix, a driver of the Red factio, on
whose pyre one of his admirers cast himself; this was in the 1st cent.
B.C.
The prasina factio is first mentioned in the reign of Tiberius (C.I.L.
vi 33950) and of Caligula (Suet. Calig. 55; Dio lix 14): the veneta first in
the time of Nero and Vitellius (C.I.L. vi 10055; Suet. Vitell. 7, 1; Dio
lxv 5). Caligula, Nero, Domitian, L. Verus, Commodus, Elagabalus
favoured the "Green"; Vitellius and Caracalla the “Blue.'”
interdixit histrionibus scaenam: cf. Plin. Pan. 46, Obtinuit aliquis
(i.e. Domitian) ut spectaculum pantomimorum populus Romanus tolli
pateretur... Rogatus es tu (i.e. Trajan) quod cogebat alius (i.e. Dom.),
coepitque esse beneficium, quod necessitas fuerat.
Neque enim a te minore
concentu ut tolleres pantomimos, quam a patre tuo (i.e. Nerva) ut restitueret
exactum est. Utrumque recte: nam et restitui oportebat quos sustulerat
malus princeps et tolli restitutos. Under the Empire the word histrio
("actor'") came to be used specially of a pantomimus or dancer. Such
histriones enjoyed extraordinary favour; cf. Tac. Dial. 29, Iam vero
propria et peculiaria huius urbis vitia paene in utero matris concipi mihi
videntur, histrionalis favor et gladiatorum equorumque studia. Besides
public performances in the theatres, the emperors and wealthy families
kept histriones for their private entertainment (cf. Aug. 74). The licence
in which they indulged gave rise to abuses which the emperors made
spasmodic efforts to check. Augustus, though he limited or abolished the
ius virgarum in histriones of the praetors (Aug. 45, Tac. A. i 77), punished
severely their misconduct in private life or on the stage. Tiberius banished
all histriones from Italy (Tac. A. iv 14, cf. Suet. Tib. 37), but Caligula
restored them (Dio lix 2). In 56 Nero again expelled the pantomimi, but
they reappear before 60. Titus refused to countenance his favourite pages
who were the leading pantomimi of the day (Tit. 7, 2). Nerva, at the
request of the people, removed Domitian's ban. Trajan reimposed it, but
withdrew it after his Dacian triumph in 107. Hadrian allowed the imperial
dancers (aulici histriones) to appear on the public stage (Spart. Hadr. 19).
See Friedl., Sitteng. ii10 125 sqq.
castrari mares vetuit: in 82 A.D.; cf. Philostr. vit. Apollon, vi 42,
Δομετιανοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ὑπὸ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον εὐνούχους τὸ μὴ ποιεῖν νομοθετήσαντος.
Dio (lxvii 2) says that he did this as a slur on Titus: καίπερ καὶ αὐτὸς
᾿Εαρίνου τινὸς εὐνούχου ἐρῶν, ὅμως, ἐπειδὴ καὶ ὁ Τίτος ἰσχυρῶς περὶ τοὺς ἐκτομίας
ἐσπουδάκει, ἀπηγόρευσεν ἐπὶ ἐκείνου ὕβρει μηδένα ἔτι ἐν τῇ τῶν ῾Ῥωμαίων ἀρχῇ
ἐκτέμνεσθαι. The reform is praised by Statius (S. iv 3, 13 sqq.) and by
Martial (ii 60, vi 2, etc.). Ammianus (xviii 4, 5) mentions it as a
redeeming feature of Domitian's reign: Horum et similium taedio iuvat
veterem laudare Domitianum, qui, licet patris fratrisque dissimilis
memoriam nominis sui inexpiabili detestatione perfudit, tamen receptissima
inclaruit lege qua minaciter interdixerat ne intra terminos iuris dictionis
Romanae castraret quisquam puerum. Nerva renewed this law, and
Hadrian made offenders against it liable to the penalties of the Lex
Cornelia de sicariis.
mangones: see on Vesp. 4, 3; cf. Mart. ix 6, 4 (referring to this law
of Domitian): Non puer avari sectus arte mangonis | virilitatis damna
maeret ereptae.
pretia moderatus est: presumably lest the dealers, if they were
allowed to ask exorbitant prices for their remaining stock, might be
tempted to break the law (Baumg.-Cr.). For the prices of eunuchs (varying
from about £20 to £4000) see Marquardt, Privatl.2 174.
§ 2. ad: temporal, on the occasion of"; cf. Calig. 51, 1, ad minima
tonitrua et fulgura conivere solebat. See App. i. § 12.
quondam: very frequently used by Suet. in the sense of aliquando;
cf. c. 14, 1: 18, 2: Oth. 3, 2: Vesp. 5, 4: 25: Tit. 8, 1.
edixit: between Oct. 91 and Sept. 92 (Euseb.).
novellaret:
=
novas vites sereret, “plant new vines." The only other
instance cited of the use of this verb is in the Christian writer Paulinus
Nolanus, carm. 21, 659, vitam novellantes Deo, where it is used in a metaphorical sense of a new devotion or consecration. We find the adj. novella
used as an epithet of vitis in Verg. E. iii 11, atque mala vites incidere
falce novellas (cf. Varr. R.R. i 31, 1, novellae vineae); the subst. novelletum, “a vine-nursery," occurs in Dig. xxv 1, 6.
ut in provinciis vina succiderentur: Philostratus (vit. Soph. i 6)
refers to this legislation of Domitian about vines in Asia, and says it was
due to the idea that wine leads to sedition: ἐδόκει τῷ βασιλεῖ μὴ εἶναι τῇ
᾿Ασίᾳ ἀμπέλους, ἐπειδὴ ἐν οἴνῳ στασιάζειν ἔδοξαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαιρεῖσθαι μὲν τὰς ἤδη
πεφυτευμένας, ἄλλας δὲ μὴ φυτεύειν ἔτι. Again (vit. Apollon. vi 42) he
describes how Apollonius encouraged the Ionians to send an embassy to
Domitian to urge the repeal of this measure on the ground that the
emperor, though he had provided against men being made sterile, was
rendering the earth sterile (τῶν μὲν ἀνθρώπων φειδόμενος, τὴν δὲ γὴν εὐνουχίζων).
The Ionians sent the sophist Scopelianus, who met with such success that
not merely was permission to plant vines granted, but a fine was imposed
on those who did not plant them.
nec exequi rem perseveravit: for nec (= neque vero, neque tamen) cf.
Oth. 1, 1, senator est factus nec praeturae gradum excessit. We may
assume that the petitions of the vine-growers influenced the emperor, but
Suetonius (c. 14, 2) states that it was the boding import of some Greek
verses circulated against him which more than anything else led him to
revoke his order. Statius (S. iv 3, 11) says: qui (i.e. Domitian) castae
Cereri diu negata | reddit iugera sobriasque terras; and Vollmer (ad loc.)
infers that the prohibition of vine-growing must still have had some force
in 95 A.D., the year in which this poem of Statius was written. Rostovtzeff
(Soc. and Econ. Hist. Rom. Emp. p. 189) says that it was apparently
enforced in Africa, to a certain extent in the Danube provinces, in the
north and centre of Gaul, and in part of Spain. On the subject of vineculture in the provinces and the restrictions imposed on it in the interest
of the Italian growers see Marquardt, Privatl.2 p. 446; Mommsen, Prου.
Rom. Emp. i 108. As early as 129 B.C. the planting of the vine and olive
was forbidden in the provinces beyond the Alps (Cic. de rep. iii 9, 16)
and this restriction was not completely removed till the reign of Probus
(276-282 A.D.); cf. Vopisc. Prob. 18, Gallis omnibus et Hispanis ac
Britannis hic permisit ut vites haberent vinumque conficerent.
quaedam ex maximis officiis: important positions in the imperial
household such as ab epistulis, a libellis, a rationibus, a patrimonio, which
were held exclusively by freedmen down to Nero's time. Otho made an
innovation by appointing as his secretary (ab epistulis) the orator Secundus
(Plut. Oth. 9). Vitellius transferred such offices to equites: Tac. H. і 58,
Vitellius ministeria principatus per libertos agi solita in equites Romanos
disponit. An instance of an eques under Vitellius holding posts previously
held by liberti is Propertianus who is described in C.I.L. xi 5028 (Dessau
1447) as "pro(curator) imp(eratoris) a patrim(onio) et heredit (atibus) et
a libell(is)." See Hirschfeld, Kais. Verwaltungsb. p. 112, n. 4. Domitian,
as Suetonius says here, divided the posts between liberti and equites. An
eques so appointed was Cn. Octavius Titinius Capito (friend of the younger
Pliny, cf. Ep. i 17, etc.) who was “procurator) ab epistulis et a patrimonio
(sc. Domitiani),” ‘‘iterum ab epistulis divi Nervae,” and “ab epistulis
tertio imp. Traiani” (C.I.L. vi 798, Dessau 1448). Hadrian, who established a Civil Service at Rome, excluded liberti and confined these offices
to equites; cf. Spart. Hadr. 22, ab epistulis et a libellis primus equites
Romanos habuit (“primus'' is inaccurate, as Mommsen points out,
Staatsr. ii³ 838, n. 2). Domitian in his administration limited in every
way the authority of the senate (cf. Plin. Pan. 62), and gave increased
power to the equites and liberti. He appointed as commander in his Dacian
campaign (c. 6, 1) Cornelius Fuscus who was praefectus praetorio (an
equestrian post, see on Tit. 6, 1). An equestrian procurator of Asia was
commissioned to govern the province in place of the proconsul who had
died (C.I.L. v 875). He included equites as well as senators in his consilium (C.I.L. ix 5420), and so a senator, tried before the imperial consilium, might have equites and not merely his peers as judges. The favour
shown by Domitian to freedmen (cf. Tac. H. i 76, Agr. 41; Plin. Pan. 42,
49, 88) was a reaction from the repressive policy of Titus and Vespasian,
and a reversion to the privileges given to them by Vitellius, Otho, Galba,
Nero, Claudius, and Caligula.
§ 3. geminari castra prohibuit: geminare is used here not in the
sense of duplicare but of coniungere; cf. Hor. A.P. 13, serpentes avibus
geminentur: Stat. S. i 2, 240, dat Iuno verenda | vincula et insigni
geminat Concordia taeda. When several legions were united in the one
camp, the consciousness of their strength often led to mutiny. On the
death of Augustus three legions in Pannonia, which were quartered in the
same summer-camp (aestiva), revolted (Tac. A. i 16), and at the same time
four legions similarly concentrated in Lower Germany conspired to make
Germanicus emperor (A. i 39).
ad signa deponi: each camp had its shrine, usually in the principia
(Oth. 1, 2, n.), in which the ensigns were placed and the imagines of the
emperors were worshipped. This shrine formed an inviolable sanctuary..
In a vault beneath it were deposited the savings of the legionaries which
were kept and administered by the ensign-bearers (signiferi). When the
soldiers received a donativum on the occasion of any special success, etc.,
half of it must be deposited under the protection of the ensigns; cf.
Veget. ii 20, Illud vero ab antiquis divinitus institutum est, ut ex donativo,
quod milites consequuntur, dimidia pars sequestraretur apud signa, et ibidem
ipsis militibus servaretur, ne per luxum aut inanium rerum comparationem
a contubernalibus posset absumi. Miles deinde, qui sumptus suos scit apud
signa depositos, de deserendo nihil cogitat, magis diligit signa, pro illis in
acie fortius dimicat, more humani ingenii, ut pro illis habeat maximam
curam, in quibus suam videt positam esse substantiam. Vegetius says that
each cohort had a sack (follis) in which these sums were placed under the
charge of the signifer.
The evidence of Latin papyri containing military
accounts establishes the fact that the sum credited to a soldier's depositaccount from such irregular donativa was augmented by additions from
his regular pay; the expenses for food, clothing, etc. are deducted from
his stipendium and any surplus is added to his deposit. See Grenfell,
Hunt, and Hogarth, Fayûm Towns and their Papyri pp. 252 sqq.; Reinach,
in Daremberg-Saglio iv 1324 sqq.; Parker, Rom. Legions, 217 sqq.
L. Antonius: see c. 6, 2.
apud duarum legionum hiberna: i.e. the winter-quarters of the 14th
and 21st legions at Moguntiacum (Mainz). The other two legions under
the command of L. Antonius in Upper Germany were the 8th (Augusta),
encamped at Argentoratum (Strassburg), and the 11th (Claudia), encamped
at Vindonissa (Windisch). There does not seem to be any authority for
assuming that they took part in the revolt.
addidit quartum stipendium militi: in 83 A.D., to celebrate his victory
over the Chatti; cf. Zonaras xi 19, καὶ τοῖς στρατιώταις ἐπηύξησε τὴν μισθοφοράν, τάχα διὰ τὴν νίκην· πέντε γὰρ καὶ ἑβδομήκοντα δραχμὰς (= denarios)
ἑκάστου λαμβάνοντος ἑκατὸν ἐκέλευσε δίδοσθαι. From the time of Julius Caesar
payments were made to the soldiers every four months, each payment being
called a stipendium, so that the soldiers got three stipendia each year.
Caesar also raised the pay for the foot-soldier to 225 denarii a year, so
that each stipendium was 75 denarii. The number of stipendia remained
the same under Domitian (as Zon. implies), but he raised each of the
three stipendia to 100 denarii, or a total amount of 300 denarii a year;
this addition to the earlier pay being equivalent to paying a fourth
stipendium of 75 denarii. See Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 96.
aureos ternos: = 75 denarii; see on Galb. 20, 2.
CHAPTER 8.
ius diligenter et industrie dixit: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, 2, ius aequissime dixit; cf. Iul. 43, 1, ius laboriosissime ac severissime dixit: Aug. 33, 1,
ipse ius dixit assidue et in noctem nonnunquam, si parum corpore valeret,
lectica pro tribunali collocata, vel etiam domi cubans: ib. 72, 2, Tibur,
ubi etiam in porticibus Herculis templi persaepe ius dixit. For the civil
and criminal jurisdiction of the emperors in virtue of their imperium see
Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 958 sqq.; Willems, Le Droit Publique Romain
458 sqq.; Greenidge, Roman Public Life 381 sqq.
plerumque
"Ius
..
ordinem: in the early editions the punctuation was
.dixit. Plerumque rescidit''; the punctuation in the text is
that proposed by Burman and adopted by Oudendorp, Ernesti, and the
modern editors; Oudendorp suggested another punctuation “pro tribunali.
Extra ordinem.. rescidit," and Mommsen (Staatsr. ii³ 981, n. 1) approves
of this, thinking that there is a distinction made between Domitian's own
jurisdiction and the extraordinary supervision which he exercised over the
iudices, partly by admonition and partly by quashing their decisions.
et in Foro: et means in addition to his sittings in his palace and his
arx Albana. Criminal cases, as a rule, were heard by the emperor in his
own house; when he sat in the Forum he nearly invariably heard civil cases
(Mommsen, op. cit. ii³ 965, n. 4; 983, n. 3). Dio frequently mentions the
emperors sitting as judges in the Forum; e.g. lvii 7 (of Tiberius),
ἐπεποίητο βῆμα ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ, ἐφ᾽ οὗ προκαθίζων ἐχρημάτιζε : lx 4 (of Claudius),
τὸ μὲν πλεῖστον ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ, ἤδη δὲ καὶ ἄλλοθι ἐπὶ βήματος ἐδίκαζε : lxvi 10 (of
Vespasian), ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ πολλάκις ἐδίκαζεν : lxix 7 (of Hadrian), ἐδίκαζε
τότε μὲν ἐν τῷ Παλατίῳ, τότε δὲ ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ τῷ τε Πανθείῳ καὶ ἄλλοθι πολλαχόθι,
ἀπὸ βήματος, ὥστε δημοσιεύεσθαι τὰ γιγνόμενα.
pro tribunali: see on Vesp. 7, 2. Magistrates administering justice in
the Forum (Tit. 4, 2) at the place called the Comitium (Dom. 8, 4) sat
on a sella curulis placed on a platform (tribunal, βῆμα).
..
extra ordinem: Domitian may have followed the example of Claudius
in sitting on days usually exempt from legal business: Claud. 14, Ius
laboriosissime dixit, etiam suis suorumque diebus sollemnibus (i.e. anniversaries in his family), nonnumquam festis quoque antiquitus et religiosis.
Nec semper praescripta legum secutus, etc.; but the Princeps always
judged extra ordinem, by cognitio (Tit. 7, 1, n.), the case being decided
either by himself alone or with the assistance of counsellors chosen at his
own discretion, down to the time of the definite organisation of the consilium principis under Hadrian. Bentley proposed to insert et before extra
ordinem.
ambitiosas sententias: verdicts prompted by interested motives, by a
desire to curry favour; cf. Cic. Cluent. 38, 108, quo in reo qui absolvit
ambitiosus existimatur: Ulp. Dig. iv 43, ambitiosa decreta.
centumvirorum: see on Vesp. 10.
reciperatores: see on Vesp. 3.
perfusoriis: “ unsubstantial,”
“unfounded,” "superficial," lit.
"sprinkled on the surface and not sinking deep"; cf. Sen. Ep. 23, 4, haec,
quibus delectatur vulgus, tenuem habent et perfusoriam voluptatem hoc,
de quo loquor, solidum est, et quod plus pateat introrsus. So too the adv.
perfusorie means “vaguely,” “indefinitely"; Ulp. Dig. xliii 24, 5, debebit
..
neque quidem perfusorie, aut obscure, dicere aut denuntiare. In Cic.
Rosc. Amer. 29, 80 there is the phrase aliquem iudicio perfundere, which
Forcellini interprets: iudicii vexationem, ceu aquam, offundere, in ius
vocare, et afficere molestia sistendi se ante iudicem, parandae defensionis,
et causae dicendae; eadem ratione “aspergere alicui molestiam'' dixit Cic.
Q. Fr. ii 10. Halm conjectured pervertere; Trojel pessundare. From
that use of perfundere Ernesti (followed by Baumg.-Cr.) explains perfusoria
assertio here as "ea qua dominus (slave-owner) iustus adducitur per
calumniam litis . . in periculum servi amittendi.”
assertionibus: ‘assertio” tam a servitute in libertatem, quam a libertate in servitutem trahi significat (Priscian iii 365, 9). The word is post-Aug. See on Vesp. 3, ingenuam pronuntiatam, patre asserente. Dio (lxvii
13) mentions that Domitian, as censor, restored to his former owner a slave
who had been illegally declared freeborn and had risen to be a centurion:
Κλαύδιον Πακᾶτον τῷ δεσπότη καίπερ ἑκατονταρχηκότα ἀπέδωκεν, ὅτι ἠλέγχθη
δοῦλος ὤν.
nummarios: = corruptos "bribed," a Ciceronian word.
cum suo consilio: in civil proceedings where the final decision lay
with an individual, either as judge (iudex) or arbitrator (arbiter), he
brought in a consilium of counsellors or assessors (consiliarii, assessores,
cf. Galb. 14, 2) to assist him in arriving at a decision; cf. Cic. Quinct. 2,
10; Q. Rosc. 4, 12; Verr. ii 29, 71; Plin. Εp. v 1; Val. Max. viii 2, 2;
Gell. N.A. xii 13, 2: xiv 2,9. See Mommsen, Staatsr. i³ 314.
§ 2. tribunis: the emperor directed the tribunes to bring the indictment for repetundae before the senate, probably because a private accuser
could not bring a charge against a magistrate who was in office (Mommsen,
ii³ 121). The usual procedure in a cognitio senatus was for the accuser to
lodge his complaint with the consuls, and if the case was admitted by
them, the matter came before the senate, which formed the high court of
criminal judicature under the Empire; cf. Tac. A. ii 28, adit consules,
cognitionem senatus poscit: xiii 14, postulatus apud consules a patre interfectae.
sordidum: αἰσχροκερδῆ; cf. Cic. Fam. xiii 36, quosdam sordidos
homines qui Caesaris beneficia vendebant: Plin. Ep. iii 9, 2, proconsulatum
..
non minus violenter quam sordide gesserat. So sordes is used for low
avarice, despicable extortion on the part of a magistrate; e.g. Plin. Ep. ii
12, 4, damnatus sordium: Ven. Sat. Dig. xlviii 11, 6, utque urbani magistratus ab omni sorde se abstineant, neve plus doni muneris in anno accipiant
quam quod sit aureorum centum.
repetundarum: see on Oth. 2, 2.
iudices a senatu petendi: in cases of repetundae or peculatus heard
before the senate, if the accused was convicted the senate did not itself
fix the amount to be refunded (litis aestimatio), but appointed senatorial
iudices or reciperatores (usually 3 or 5) for the purpose. Sometimes the
case was referred directly to such special commissioners; cf. Tac. A. i 74,
de pecuniis repetundis ad reciperatores itum est: Plin. Ep. ii 11, 2, Marius
Priscus omissa defensione iudices petiit; iv 9, 16; vi 29, 10.
provinciarum praesidibus: see on Vesp. 6, 4.
neque modestiores umquam neque iustiores: for modestia see on
Tit. 4, 1. Schiller (Gesch. röm. Kaiserz. i 533) says that Domitian took
as his model Tiberius, whose memoirs were his constant reading (Dom. 20),
and that with the possible exception of Tiberius no emperor kept his magistrates at home and abroad under stricter discipline. Domitian's careful
choice of his officials is praised by Statius, S. v 1, 79: vidit, qui cuncta
suorum | novit et inspectis ambit latus omne ministris. His repression of
the plundering practised by provincial governors is eulogised by Silius
Italicus, Pun. xiv 685: At ni cura viri, qui nunc dedit otia mundo, |
effrenum arceret populandi cuncta furorem, | nudassent avidae terrasque
fretumque rapinae. Baebius Massa, governor of Hispania Baetica, was
prosecuted by Pliny in 93 A.D. on the complaint of the provincials and was
convicted of extortion (Plin. Ep. iii 4, vii 33). This is the only known
case of provincial accusation during his reign. In later times Domitian
was cited as an example of the truth that a bad emperor with good amici
is less injurious than a good emperor with bad amici, Trajan being instanced as a good emperor who incurred odium by entrusting the State to
unprincipled men (Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 65). Among those designated to
the consulship by Domitian were Nerva, Trajan, Verginius Rufus, Agricola,
and the grandfather of Antoninus Pius (Duruy, op. cit. iv 697 n.). Pliny
was quaestor in 90, tribune in 92, praetor in 93; Tacitus was praetor in 88
(H. i 1, dignitatem nostram
a Domitiano longius provectam non
abnuerim).
§ 3. suscepta correctione morum: so Land some of the later MSS.;
the others have correptione, a word very often used by Christian writers.
For correctio morum (= censura) cf. Tib. 42, 1, in ipsa publicorum morum
correctione: Tib. 33, si qua in publicis moribus desidia aut mala consuetudine labarent, corrigenda suscepit. After his victory over the Chatti
in 83 A.D. (c. 6, 1) Domitian took the censorship for life, a unique event
in the history of that office; cf. Dio lxvii 4, τιμητὴς δὲ διὰ βίου πρῶτος δὴ
καὶ μόνος καὶ ἰδιωτῶν καὶ αὐτοκρατόρων ἐχειροτονήθη. Martial (vi 4, 1) salutes
him as "censor maxime, principumque princeps"; cf. Quintilian (iv
prooem. 2), Cum vero mihi Domitianus Augustus sororis suae nepotum
delegaverit curam, non satis honorem iudiciorum caelestium intelligam,
nisi ex hoc oneris quoque magnitudinem metiar. Quis enim mihi aut
mores excolendi sit modus, ut eos non immerito probaverit sanctissimus
censor? etc. His censorship is also referred to in Juv. iv 11, Sed nunc de
factis levioribus, et tamen alter | si fecisset idem, caderet sub iudice morum;
in ii 29 sqq. Juvenal bitterly contrasts Domitian's moral ordinances as
censor with his scandalously immoral conduct in relation to his niece Julia
(see c. 22).
in equite: = inter equites; cf. Claud. 25, 4, in senatu (i.e. among the
senators in the orchestra) sedentes. The seats of the knights in the theatre
are called by Suet. equestria (c. 4, 5 n.); cf. Calig. 26, 4, describing how
Caligula, to foment discord between the plebs and the equites, used to have
the tickets for gifts scattered about in the theatre before the appointed
time, in order that the rabble might occupy the equestria and a quarrel
might ensue when the equites claimed their reserved seats. By the lex
Roscia theatralis (67 B.c.) the equites were assigned the 14 rows of seats
in the theatre immediately behind the senators' seats in the orchestra.
Augustus allowed equites who had been impoverished by the civil wars to
sit in the 14 rows, provided that they themselves once had, or their parents
had had, the census equester of 400,000 sesterces (Aug. 40, 1).
Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 534. Any unqualified person occupying the seats
of the equites was liable to a penalty (poena theatralis) and summary
ejection by the attendant (designator theatralis). Such ejections are mentioned by Martial as following Domitian's ordinance (88/89 A.D.); e.g.
▼ 8, Edictum domini deique nostri, | quo subsellia certiora fiunt | et puros
eques ordines recepit, | dum laudat modo Phasis in theatro, | Phasis
purpureis ruber lacernis, | et iactat tumido superbus ore: | “Tandem commodius licet sedere, | nunc est reddita dignitas equestris; | turba non
See
2 N
premimur neque inquinamur”: | haec et talia dum refert supinus, | illas
purpureas et adrogantes | iussit surgere Leitus lacernas.
scripta famosa: libellous verse was punished with the death-penalty
under the xii Tables; cf. Cic. Rep. iv 10, 12, nostrae duodecim tabulae cum
perpaucas res capite sanxissent in his quoque sanciendum putaverunt si
quis occentavisset sive carmen condidisset quod infamiam faceret flagitiumve
alteri: Hor. S. ii 1, 82, si mala condiderit in quem quis carmina, ius est |
iudiciumque (cf. Ep. ii 1, 152); libel and slander against the leading men
of the State were included under maiestas, or treason, by the lex Cornelia
maiestatis of Sulla. A cognitio de famosis libellis was first established by
Augustus; cf. Tac. A. i 72, primus Augustus cognitionem de famosis libellis
specie legis eius (i.e. de maiestate) tractavit, commotus Cassii Severi libidine
qua viros feminasque inlustres procacibus scriptis diffamaverat: Suet.
Aug. 55: Dio lvi 27. Under Tiberius any writings or spoken words which
could be construed as reflecting in any way on the emperor were held to
be maiestas and punishable with death. Mayor, on Juv. i 152, gives many
examples of writers of pasquils and lampoons who were punished by the
emperors.
abolevit: prob. "burned"; cf. Tib. 61, 3, animadversum statim in
auctores scriptaque abolita (= Tac. A. iv 35, libros per aediles cremandos
censuere patres; Dio lvii 24, πρὸς τῶν ἀγορανόμων ἐκαύθη) : Plin. Εp. vii 19,
6, libros [Senecionis] abolitos (= Tac. Agr. 2, in libros [Senecionis]
saevitum ut in comitio et foro urerentur).
quaestorium virum: Caecilius Rufinus; Dio lxvii 13, ἔπραξε δέ τι καὶ ὡς
τιμητὴς (censor) ἀξιόλογον, Καικίλιον γὰρ ῾Ῥουφῖνον ἀπήλασεν ἐκ τοῦ συνεδρίου
(senatu movit) ὅτι ὠρχεῖτο. He is not mentioned elsewhere.
A
gesticulandi: cf. Ner. 42, 2, iocularia carmina lasciveque modulata,
quae vulgo notuerunt, etiam gesticulatus est (i.e. represented in pantomime) :
Petron. Satyr. 36, scissor ("carver") ad symphoniam gesticulatus laceravit
obsonium. The verb is post-Aug.; Cic. uses agere (facere) gestum.
pantomimus in his dances had to depict by his various rhythmical motions
and gestures different characters in different situations, generally of a
passionate and erotic kind; hence such phrases as "speaking hands"
(manus loquacissimae, linguosi digiti, Cassiod. Var. iv 51) and "eloquent
dancing'' (saltare diserte, Tac. Dial. 26). A pantomimus is sometimes
called gesticulator or gesticularius.
movit senatu: movere, eiicere, praeterire (in recitando, i.e. at the public
reading of the list) were the verbs used for the rejection and omission of
senators by the censors. As censor the emperor could remove names from
the senate for moral delinquencies, as was done in the old days by the
ordinary censors at the lectio senatus; moreover, the revision of the lists
of the senate and equites was an admitted right of the Princeps as such;
Dio liii 17, καὶ τοὺς μὲν καταλέγουσι καὶ ἐς τὴν ἱππάδα καὶ ἐς τὸ βουλευτικόν, τοὺς
δὲ καὶ ἀπαλείφουσιν, ὅπως ἂν αὐτοῖς δόξῃ. See Greenidge, op. cit. 347, 374.
probrosis feminis: probrum often means unchastity, lewdness; cf.
Iul. 43, 1, (quoted below): Vitell. 4: Tit. 10, 2: Cic. Phil. ii 38, 99, probri
insimulasti pudicissimam feminam. Dio (lxvii 12) is sarcastic on Domitian,
the adulterer, punishing adultery: συχνοὶ δὲ καὶ ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες τῶν
πλουσίων ἐπὶ μοιχείᾳ ἐκολάσθησαν, ὧν ἔνιαι καὶ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐμοιχεύθησαν.
lecticae usum ademit: Julius Caesar prohibited the use of the lectica
by women who had neither husbands nor children and who were under the
age of 45 (Euseb.-Hieron. Chron. p. 137 Schoene); cf. Suet. Iul. 43, 1,
Lecticarum usum, item conchyliatae vestis et margaritarum nisi certis
personis et aetatibus perque certos dies ademit. One restriction on the
use of the lectica was that it was confined to persons of free birth, fòr
Suetonius mentions the “ius vehendi lectica per urbem” as one of the
special privileges granted by Claudius to his freedman Harpocras (Claud.
28). The wives of senators were carried in a canopied lectica closed with
curtains (σκιμπόδιον κατάστεγον, Dio lvii 15).
ius capiendi legata ademit: this penalty was copied from that
imposed on celibates by the lex Iulia de maritandis ordinibus of Augustus;
cf. Gaius ii 111, caelibes qui lege Iulia hereditates legataque capere
vetantur.
..
ob reductam uxorem: although Domitian himself had done exactly
the same thing in the case of his wife Domitia (see c. 3, 1).
Julius
Caesar, as a judge, showed a similar moral strictness; cf. Iul. 43, 1,
diremit nuptias praetorii viri, qui digressam a marito post biduum statim
duxerat, quamvis sine probri (= adulterii) suspicione.
erasit iudicum albo: cf. Claud. 16, 2, non modo albo iudicum erasit,
sed in peregrinitatem redegit. The iudices (see on Galb. 14, 3) in a quaestio
were selected from an album compiled by the praetor from those qualified
to serve. The word album (λεύκωμα) was used originally of the white
board or tablet on which magisterial announcements, and especially the
praetor's edict, were published; it then came to be used of any list or
register, e.g. Tac. A. iv 42, albo senatorio erasit: Suet. Ner. 21, 1, nomen
suum in albo profitentium citharoedorum (i.e. the list of competing lyre-players) iussit ascribi.
ex utroque ordine: senatorio et equestri.
lege Scantinia: the lex Scantinia de venere nefanda (anterior to Cicero,
but of uncertain date) punished with a fine of 10,000 sesterces (Quintil. iv
2, 69) unnatural offences against ingenui; cf. Cael. ad Cic. Fam. viii 12, 3;
14, 4: Juv. ii 44: Auson. Epigr. 91 (89), 4: Prudent. Peristeph. x 204.
Domitian himself was not guiltless of such practices; see Stat. S. iii 4, 37.
Dill (Roman Society from Nero to M. Aurelius p. 54) argues that Domitian,
in spite of his own delinquencies, may have been sincere in his censorial
regimen morum: “A voluptuary, with a calm outlook on his time, may
have a wish to restrain vices with which he is himself tainted. A statesman may be a puritan reformer, both in religion and morals, without being
personally severe and devout. Domitian may have had a genuine, if a
pedantic, desire to restore the old Roman tone in morals and religion. He
was, after all, sprung from a sober Sabine stock, although he may have
sadly degenerated from it in his own conduct. And his attempt to reform
Roman society may perhaps have been as sincere as that of Augustus."
incesta Vestalium coercuit: the Vestal virgins were regarded as
daughters of the whole community, and so unchastity in relation to them
was as heinous as incest. Their punishment by Domitian is referred to in
Stat. S. i 1, 35 (on the equestrian statue of the emperor), ipse . . prospectare
videris an tacita vigilet face Troicus ignis | atque exploratas iam laudet
Vesta ministras. Dio (lxvii 3) mentions that during the investigation of
the charges by the pontiffs (under Domitian as Pontifex Maximus) the
2N2
strain of the proceedings was such that one of the pontiffs, Helvius Agrippa,
died suddenly of shock. Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vii 6) says that when
news of the fate of the three Vestal virgins reached Ephesus, Apollonius
made a public demonstration against Domitian, praying that as Vesta's
fire was purified, so the Sun might be purified from the unjust murders
with which Domitian was polluting the world.
quoque: even during the censorship of Vespasian and Titus. For
quoque = etiam cf. Vitell. 7, 3, n.
..
priora posteriora: the Vestals (Varronilla and the sisters Oculata)
condemned in the earlier part of Domitian's reign (83/84 A.D.) were simply
sentenced to death and given a choice of deaths; Dio (lxvii 3) says that
Domitian prided himself on his clemency in not burying them alive:
αὐτὸς δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ ἠγάλλετο, ὅτι τὰς ἀειπαρθένους ὡς ἠνδρωμένας οὐ κατώρυξεν
ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλως ἀποθνήσκειν ἐκέλευσε. Six years later, in the case of Cornelia,
he showed no such clemency.
more veteri: originally the condemned Vestal was beaten to death
with rods, but Tarquinius Priscus introduced an even more awful penalty
which continued in force in later times. The doomed culprit was borne
like a corpse on a litter to the Campus Sceleratus outside the Colline Gate.
She then had to descend into an underground stone cell which was
immediately covered over with earth and she was left to a lingering death,
having been provided with a little food and a lamp. Sometimes she was
scourged before being buried alive, as in the case of Urbinia (Dion. Hal. ix
40). Cf. Plut. Num. 10, Quaest. Rom. 96; Liv. viii 15, 8: xxii 57, 3;
Dion. Hal. ii 67, viii 8.
§ 4. relegasset: see on Vesp. 15. This was a light penalty compared
with that prescribed by ancient usage for a Vestal's paramours viz. to be
beaten to death with rods while hanging on a cross (Mommsen, Strafr. 919).
Corneliam: Pliny (Ep. iv 11) describes in a spirit of intense hostility
to Domitian the condemnation and execution of Cornelia: Cum Corneliam,
Vestalium maximam, defodere vivam concupisset (Domitianus), ut qui inlustrari saeculum suum eiusmodi exemplis arbitraretur, pontificis maximi
iure seu potius immanitate tyranni, licentia domini, reliquos pontifices non
in Regiam (i.e. the Pontifical palace) sed in Albanam villam convocavit.
Nec minore scelere quam quod ulcisci videbatur absentem inauditamque
damnavit incesti, cum ipse fratris filiam (i.e. Julia, daughter of Titus)
incesto non polluisset solum verum etiam occidisset: nam vidua abortu
periit. Missi statim pontifices qui defodiendam necandamque curarent.
Illa nunc ad Vestam nunc ad ceteros deos manus tendens, multa, sed hoc
frequentissime clamitabat, “me Caesar incestam putat, qua sacra faciente
vicit, triumphavit?”” blandiens haec an irridens, ex fiducia sui an ex contemptu principis dixerit dubium est: dixit, donec ad supplicium, nescio an
innocens, certe tamquam innocens, ducta est. Quin etiam cum in illud
subterraneum cubiculum demitteretur haesissetque descendenti stola, vertit
se ac recollegit, cumque ei carnifex manum daret, aversata est et resiluit
foedumque contagium quasi plane a casto puroque corpore novissima
sanctitate (“with a last display of sanctity'') reiecit, omnibusque numeris
pudoris πολλὴν πρόνοιαν ἔσχεν εὐσχήμων πεσεῖν (Eur. Hec. 569, of Polyxena
slain at Achilles' tomb).
maximam virginem: the “virgo Vestalis maxima'' (Iul. 83, C.I.L. vi
2127, 2129-2146) acquired the title by age; cf. Ov. F. iv 639, natu maxima
virgo: Tac. A. xi 32, virginum Vestalium vetustissima: Dio liv 24,
ἡ πρεσβεύουσα. The Vestals, who were six in number, were chosen between
the ages of six and ten, and must serve for thirty years, after which they
might retire and marry or continue priestesses for life. See Marquardt,
Staatsv. iii² 336 sqq.
repetitam: see on repeti, c. 9, 2.
stupratores virgis
caedi: cf. Cato (Festus p. 241 M.), probrum
virginis Vestalis, ut capite puniretur, vir qui eam incestavisset verberibus
necaretur, lex fixa in atrio Libertatis. Pliny (l.c.) mentions only one of
the alleged paramours of Cornelia as being thus punished: Celer, eques
Romanus, cui Cornelia obiciebatur, cum in Comitio virgis caederetur, in
hac voce perstiterat, “quid feci? nihil feci.” Licinianus (see below) was
threatened with the same penalty. It is doubtful whether Juvenal (iv 8)
means to include Crispinus among the paramours of Cornelia when he says
of him: nemo malus felix, minime corruptor et idem | incestus, cum quo
nuper vittata iacebat | sanguine adhuc vivo terram subitura sacerdos.
in Comitio: cf. Liv. xxii 57, 3, L. Cantilius (a minor pontiff), qui cum
Floronia (Vestali) stuprum fecerat, a pontifice maximo eo usque virgis in
Comitio caesus erat, ut inter verbera expiraret. The Forum Romanum in
its extended sense included the Comitium which originally was separated
from it by the Rostra and lay to the north-western end of it, under the
Capitol, close to the Curia Hostilia. The Comitium was the meeting-place
of the comitia curiata, and in it was the tribunal where the praetor urbanus
administered justice; cf. Varr. L.L. v 155, Comitium ab eo quod coibant
eo comitiis curiatis et litium causâ.
praetorio viro: Valerius Licinianus, whose guilt was very doubtful
according to Pliny (l.c.): Confessus est quidem incestum, sed incertum
utrum quia verum erat an quia graviora metuebat si negasset. Fremebat
enim Domitianus aestuabatque ingenti invidia destitutus (i.e. Domitian
could get no one to support him in his odious conviction of Cornelia and
Celer). Having described the executions of Cornelia and Celer, Pliny
proceeds: Ardebat ergo Domitianus et crudelitatis et iniquitatis infamia.
Arripit Licinianum quod in agris suis occultasset Corneliae libertam (whom
Domitian wanted as a witness). Ille ab iis quibus erat curae praemonetur,
si comitium et virgas pati nollet, ad confessionem confugeret, quasi ad
veniam: fecit. Locutus est pro absente (Liciniano) Herennius Senecio tale
quiddam quale est illud κεῖται Πάτροκλος (the terse words of Antilochus
announcing the death of Patroclus to Achilles, Il. 18, 20). Ait enim “ex
advocato nuntius factus sum: Licinianus recessit" (i.e. he offers no
defence). Gratum hoc Domitiano, adeo quidem ut gaudio proderetur
diceretque "absolvit nos Licinianus” (i.e. by his admission of guilt he
clears me from the imputation of injustice). Domitian allowed Licinianus
to rescue any effects he could before his goods were confiscated, and gave
him an easy place of exile as a reward. Nerva transferred him to Sicily,
where he was a professor of rhetoric at the time Pliny wrote. Henderson,
Five Roman Emperors p. 15, says: “Much pity has recently been lavished
upon the Vestal Cornelia, whom Domitian commanded to be buried alive,
more maiorum, for incest. Pliny indeed inclines to believe her innocent,
and declares that the Emperor condemned her to her ghastly doom unheard. His contemporary Suetonius has no doubt of her guilt, neither did
any later Emperor recall her supposed paramour from exile."
quaestionibus atque tormentis: though a quaestio did not necessarily
involve tormenta, the two generally went together; e.g. Calig. 32, 1, saepe
in conspectu prandentis vel comissantis seriae quaestiones per tormenta
habebantur: Claud. 34, 1, tormenta quaestionum repraesentabat. So
quaestio is used in the sense of tormenta; e.g. Dom. 10, 5, novo quaestionis
genere distorsit: Aug. 19, 2, nihil exprimi quaestione potuit.
•
de semet professo: profiteri indicium was the phrase for turning
informer; Licinianus admitted his own guilt. Suetonius only uses -met
with the reflexive pronoun (cf. sibimet, Vesp. 20).
exilium indulsit: Plin. (l.c.), exilium molle velut praemium dedit. For
the constr., which is post-Aug., cf. Claud. 24, 1, ornamenta consularia procuratoribus indulsit: Dom. 11, 3, ut damnatis liberum mortis arbitrium
indulgeatis: Aug. 41, 1, usum eius (pecuniae) gratuitum iis
indulsit.
§ 5. templo Capitolini Iovis: see c. 5.
CHAPTER 9.
inter initia: see on c. 3, 1.
Suetonius is referring to the period
when Domitian, being little more than eighteen years of age, began his
public career at Rome after the victory of Vespasian's forces over the
Vitellians at the end of 69. See c. 1, 3.
ab omni caede abhorrebat: Stahr cites as a parallel the case of
Robespierre, who in his youth could not bear the sight of blood and was
a vehement opponent of the death-penalty.
absente adhuc patre: Vespasian did not arrive at Rome from
Alexandria before the late summer or the autumn of 70.
Vergili versum: Georg. ii 536, Ante etiam sceptrum Dictaei regis
(= Iovis) et ante | impia quam caesis gens est epulata iuvencis, | aureus
hanc vitam in terris Saturnus agebat. To slay the ox, the fellow-labourer
of the husbandman, was in primitive times an impiety to be punished with
death; cf. Varr. R.R. ii 5, (Bos) socius hominum in rustico opere et Cereris
minister; ab hoc antiqui manus ita abstineri voluerunt, ut capite sanxerint,
siquis occidisset: Cic. N.D. ii 63, 159, quibus (bubus) cum terrae subigerentur fissione glaebarum, ab illo aureo genere, ut poetae loquuntur, vis
nulla umquam afferebatur: “Ferrea tum vero proles exorta repente est |
ausaque funestum prima est fabricarier ensem | et gustare manu vinctum
domitumque iuvencum.” Tanta putabatur utilitas percipi e bubus, ut
eorum visceribus vesci scelus haberetur. (Cicero's verses are a translation
of Arat. Phaen. 129 sqq.) The same view is expressed in Ov. M. xv 120 sqq.;
Plin. N.H. viii 45; Colum. vi praef.
e diverso: = contra, e contrario; cf. Iul. 86, 2, alii e diverso opinantur:
Aug. 27, 2. In Virg., Liv., Vell. Pat., Quintil., etc., ex diverso means
"from the opposite quarter," "on the opposite side," in which sense
Pliny (N.H. iv 9) and Justin (xxx 4, 6) have e diverso, but Pliny elsewhere
(cf. Sillig on N.H. xiv 35) always has e diverso with the same meaning
as it has in Suetonius. See Thes. Ling. Lat. v 1585; Krebs-Schmalz,
Antibarb. i 424.
abstinentiae: see on "abstinuit,” Tit. 7, 3.
§ 2. circa: see on Tit. 4, 3. For prosecutus see on Tit. 2.
sordide: used here of meanness in spending money, as in Ner. 30, 1,
sordidos ac deparcos esse quibus impensarum ratio constaret; in c. 8, 2
it is used of meanness in exacting money.
hereditates
non recepit: legacies from those who had children were
refused also by Hadrian (Spart. Hadr. 18), Antoninus Pius (Capitol. Pius 8),
and Pertinax (id. Pert. 7). Augustus, though valuing highly legacies from
his friends, observed the same rule: Aug. 66, 4, legata vel partes hereditatium, a quibuscumque parentibus relicta sibi, aut statim liberis eorum
concedere, aut si pupillari aetate essent, die virilis togae vel nuptiarum cum
incremento restituere consuerat. The practice of Tiberius is described in
Tac. A. ii 48: neque hereditatem cuiusquam adiit nisi cum amicitia
meruisset: ignotos et aliis infensos eoque principem nuncupantes procul
arcebat. Caligula insisted on being included in wills, and then, when
through terror strangers named him as heir among their intimates, and
parents among their children, he said that they were mocking him by not
dying, and sent poisoned cakes to many (Calig. 38, 2). Nero ordered that
the estates of those who were "ungrateful to their emperor (by leaving
him nothing) should belong to the privy purse (Ner. 32, 2; cf. Tac. A. xiv
31, xvi 11). Domitian in his later days was grasping of legacies and
claimed the estates of total strangers (see c. 12, 2). Tacitus (Agr. 43)
mentions the will of Agricola “quo coheredem optimae uxori et piissimae
filiae Domitianum scripsit," and says that Domitian was pleased by the
compliment, his mind being so blinded by constant flatteries “ut nescireť
a bono patre non scribi heredem nisi malum principem.”
Rusti Caepionis: not mentioned elsewhere. The MSS. have rusci (so
Preud'homme Rusci), but Torrentius rightly introduced Rusti, the form of
the name attested by inscriptions (e.g. C.I.L. vi 2222) in the case of some
others of the gens Rustia.
caverat: cavere or testamento cavere was the regular expression used
of providing for something by will; e.g. Cic. Fin. ii 103, dico magis fuisse
vestrum agere ("to celebrate'") Epicuri diem natalem quam illius testamento cavere ut ageretur.
ut quotannis senatoribus: two interpretations have been suggested,
of which the first seems the more probable: (1) that a sum was to be given
as a New Year's gift (strena) to all the senators every year when they
entered the senate-house for the first time (so Burman and Bremi); (2) that
a sum was to be given to each new senator when he first entered the senate-house (so Baumg.-Cr.). Mommsen (Staatsr. iii³ 895, n. 1) says that though
such gifts were usual in the municipia, Domitian regarded them as lowering
the dignity of the senate at Rome.
praestaret: the usual word for the payment of legacies; so the subst.
praestatio, e.g. Paul. Dig. xxxii 98, heredes legatorum praestatione onerare.
reos, qui apud aerarium pependissent: reos is generally explained
as State debtors, but Casaubon and Ernesti seem right in taking it as
accused persons of any kind; cf. Aug. 32, 2, where Suetonius mentions
the remissions granted by Augustus, which included (1) the burning of
all the records of old debts due to the Treasury: tabulas veterum aerarii
debitorum, vel praecipuam calumniandi materiam, exussit; (2) the striking
out of the names of all those who had long been under accusation without
being tried: diuturnorum reorum et ex quorum sordibus (i.e. the mourning
garb worn by rei) nihil aliud quam voluptas inimicis quaereretur nomina
abolevit, condicione proposita, ut si quem quis repetere vellet, par periculum
poenae subiret (i.e. the reviver of the charge, if he failed in his case, was
to be liable to the same penalty as the accused would have to pay if he
were convicted). The tabulae publicae containing the lists of accused
persons, whose cases had not been tried, but whose names had been given
in to the magistrates, were hung up in the aerarium, which was the
record-office where were lodged all laws, decrees, acta of the magistrates,
etc. (Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 546). In the aerarium were also posted the
names of defaulters against whom the Treasury officials were proceeding
to extremes: cf. Claud. 9, 2, ut, cum obligatam aerario fidem liberare non
posset, in vacuum lege praediatoria venalis pependerit sub edicto praefectorum (i.e. the edictum announcing the sale of the securities was hung
in the aerarium). Caligula wiped out arrears of criminal charges which
remained untried when he became emperor: Calig. 15, 4, criminum, si quae
residua ex priore tempore manebant, omnium gratiam fecit. The bona
damnatorum went to the fiscus: see on Vesp. 16, 3.
proximum: proximus was used of what is nearest in time, not merely
in the future, but also in the past (Iul. 83, 1; Aug. 101, 3; Cic. Cat. i 1,
etc.).
repeti: repetere was the term used by the jurists for reviving an
accusation; cf. Aug. 32, 2 (quoted above): Dom. 8, 4, Corneliam
absolutam olim, dein longo intervallo repetitam convictamque. Both repetere
reum and repetere crimen are found.
causam
causâ cadere.
teneret: the regular phrase for winning a case, opp. to
§ 3. scribas quaestorios: see on Vesp. 3. The quaestors referred to
here are primarily those attached to the provincial governors (Mommsen,
Staatsr. i 336, n. 3). Cicero lays great stress on the fact that the old
Romans forbade any buying on the part of provincial governors “quod
putabant ereptionem esse non emptionem, cum venditori suo arbitratu
vendere non liceret” (Verr. ii 4, 5).
Clodiam legem: nothing definite is known of this law. It may have
been one of the many plebiscita of Publius Clodius in his tribuneship,
58 в.с. (Mommsen, l.c.). The old and very improbable view was that it is
the lex Claudia de senatoribus, a plebiscitum of 218 B.c. directed against
trading by senators, which forbade any senator or senator's son to own a
ship of larger cubic capacity than 300 amphorae (Liv. xxi 63); Cicero
says that in his time this law was "antiqua et mortua” (Verr. v 18, 45).
subsiciva: these were oddments of land which were left over when a
territory was portioned out to the colonies of veterans planted in Italy
by Sulla, Julius Caesar, and the early emperors. These oddments had been
usurped by the local communities or neighbouring holders, though they
formed part of the ager publicus, the property of the State. Vespasian
proceeded to reclaim and sell these subsiciva to aid the fiscus, but deputations
came urging the upheaval occasioned by this disturbance of existing
occupations (quassabatur universus Italiae possessor), and Vespasian
suspended the sale; Titus proceeded anew with it, and later Domitian
issued his edict securing possession to the existing occupiers of the subsiciva. For this conversion of these squatters' tenure into proprietorship
see Heitland, Agricola p. 272.
ut usu capta: as if usucapio, or prescriptive right to a property by
undisputed possession for a certain period, were legally possible in the
case of illegal usurpers of State property; cf. Just. Inst. ii 6, 9, res fisci
nostri usucapi non potest.
veteribus possessoribus concessit: this concession is often mentioned
in the extracts from the Gromatici or Agrimensores; e.g. Siculus Flaccus
De condicione agrorum p. 163, Non enim omnis ager centuriatus in assignationem cecidit, sed et multa vacua relicta sunt, quorum ea condicio est,
quae subsicivorum; de quibus Domitianus finem statuit, id est, possessoribus
ea concessit (a centuria was a square of land, 240 rods each way, containing 100 lots, originally of two iugera; any of the ager centuriatus
not assigned would be in the same position as subsiciva): p. 284, quae cum
vel communis iuris, aut publici essent, possessionibus vicinis tunc Domitianus
imperator profudit: Frontinus, De controversiis agrorum p. 54, aeque et
Titus imperator aliqua subsiciva in Italia recollegit: praestantissimus
postea Domitianus ad hoc beneficium procurrit, et uno edicto totius Italiae
metum liberavit: Hyginus, De controv. p. 133, Domitianus per totam Italiam
subsiciva possidentibus donavit, edictoque hoc notum universis fecit. As
early in his reign as July 82 Domitian had decided a dispute about subsiciva on the same principle which he afterwards embodied in his edict
(C.I.L. ix 5420; Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2554). Augustus dealt in the same
way with places in Rome which could not be clearly proved to be public
or private property: Aug. 32, 2, loca in urbe publica iuris ambigui possessoribus adiudicavit.
fiscales calumnias: calumnia, which denoted legal chicanery of any
kind, was specially used of false accusations and vexatious prosecutions;
see Vitell. 7, 2. The delatores (Tit. 8, 5, n.) throve by giving information
about property that might be claimed for the fiscus or imperial money-chest (Vesp. 16, 3, n.), and by promoting accusations which, if successful,
would enable the fiscus to seize the property of the accused. In Ner. 32, 1
Suetonius tells us that Nero resorted to calumniae as a means of raising
money. calumniae also occurred very frequently in connexion with the
aerarium or public treasury; cf. Aug. 32, 2 (quoted above). On the
subject of delationes fiscales and the property which could legally be claimed
by the fiscus see Dig. xlix c. 14, entitled De iure fisci; also Cod. Iust. x 11
(De delationibus) containing rescripts of various emperors on the malpractices of the delatores.
repressit: contrast c. 12, where we find every kind of accusations
by delatores eagerly seized on by Domitian as grounds for his later
extortions. For the attitude of earlier emperors towards delatores see on
Tit. 8, 5.
ferebatur vox eius: Dio (lxvii 1) says that Domitian used the words
in an edict: τῇ δ᾽ αὐτῇ ταύτῃ διανοίᾳ καὶ προέγραψέ ποτε, ὅτι αὐτοκράτωρ ὅταν μὴ
κολάζῃ τοὺς συκοφάντας, αὐτός σφας ποιεῖ τοιούτους. The form of Domitian's
maxim recalls Seneca's Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, iubet. Another
saying of Domitian's was that those emperors who did not inflict punishment on many were not good emperors, but only fortunate (Dio lxvii 2).
Paridis: see on c. 3, 1.
CHAPTER 10.
impuberem: so the Basle ed. of 1533; the MSS. have puberem.
cum maxime: "at that very time"; only here in Suetonius, though
in Tib. 14, 2, Thrasyllum mathematicum.. tum maxime expertus est (= tum
expertus est maxime) there is a variant cum for tum. The words cum
maxime frequently follow tum or nunc to emphasize them; e.g. Cic. Sen. 38,
пипс сит тaxime conficio orationes (= cum maxime conficio orationes,
nunc conficio "the time when I most of all compose is now," Reid ad loc.).
Then cum maxime came to be used absolutely to express tum or nunc in a
more emphatic fashion; so in Cicero, e.g. Verr. iv 38, 82, qui сит топиmenta rerum suarum cum maxime (= nunc) constituat: in Livy, e.g. xxix
17, 20, omnia quae captae urbes patiuntur passi sumus et cum maximé
patimur: in Tacitus, e.g. H. i 29, ut qui adversas res expertus cum maxime
("at this moment'") discam ne secundas quidem minus discriminis habere.
See also Hand Turs. iii 599 sqq., Kühner-Stegmann, ii 480.
Düpow (op.
cit. p. 17) wrongly explains cum maxime aegrum here as meaning "im
höchsten Grade krank."
non absimilis: see on Oth. 1, 2.
Hermogenem Tarsensem: there is no means of fixing this historian;
he may be the Hermogenes (of uncertain date) who wrote a mythological
account of Phrygia of which a few fragments have been preserved (see
Müller, Frag. Hist. Graec. iii 523 sq.). The famous rhetorician Hermogenes
of Tarsus lived later, as he declaimed at the age of 15 before the emperor
M. Aurelius (161-180 A.D.).
figuras: "satirical allusions," "indirect attacks"; see on Vesp. 13,
causidicorum figuras lenissime tulit.
librariis: slaves employed to copy books (scriptor librarius, Hor. A.P.
354).
The author either had a sufficient number of copies produced for
publication by his own librarii, or else he gave his work to an editor who
published it for him. For the different classes of librarii see Marquardt,
Privatl. 825 sqq. Stahr mentions as a parallel to the punishment of the
librarii of Hermogenes the practice which obtains in many modern countries
of punishing the printer as well as the author and publisher of a book
that is condemned.
cruci fixis: cruci figere is post-Aug.; earlier we find cruci suffigere
(Cic., cf. Suet. Iul. 74, 1) and cruci adfigere (Plaut., Liv.). Suetonius also
uses cruce adficere (Galb. 9, 1); in crucem agere (Calig. 12, 2).
patrem familias: a plain, ordinary citizen; cf. Cic. de or. i 132, Sicut
unus paterfamilias (= unus e togatorum numero, i 111) his de rebus loquor:
i 159, effudi vobis omnia quae sentiebam, quae fortasse, quemcumque
patremfamilias adripuissetis ex aliquo circulo, eadem vobis percontantibus
respondisset.
Thraecem murmilloni: for these two kinds of gladiators and their
different equipment see on Tit. 8, 2, where the partiality of Titus for the
Thraeces is described..
munerario: the giver of the munus or gladiatorial show, i.e. Domitian
himself. The point of the remark was that the Thraex, though a match
for the murmillo, was not a match for him when backed by the favour of
Domitian with whom the decision lay. Quintilian (viii 3, 34) says that the
word munerarius was a coinage of Augustus: Quae vetera nunc sunt,
fuerunt olim nova, et quaedam sunt in usu perquam recentia, ut Messala
primus “reatum,””‘“munerarium” Augustus primus dixerunt. Florus (iii
20, 9) has munerator in this sense; later writers use editor.
detractum spectaculis: cf. Calig. 35, 3, hunc spectaculis detractum
repente et in harenam deductum Thraeci comparavit ("matched him
against'"). For spectacula in the sense of subsellia spectatorum cf. Plaut.
Curc. 645, spectacula ruunt: Cic. Sest. 58, 124, ex omnibus spectaculis
plausus est excitatus: Tac. A. xiv 13, exstructos spectaculorum gradus
("tiers"). It was also used = locus quo spectacula eduntur; e.g. Aug.
58, 1, ineunti (Augusto) Romae spectacula.
canibus obiecit: among the offenders whom Caligula threw to the
wild beasts were those who criticized his shows (male de munere suo
opinatos, Calig. 27, 3).
titulo: a label was hung from his neck, like the titulus on the neck
of a slave exposed for sale which stated any special aptitudes, physical
defects, previous misconduct, etc. (cf. Plin. Ep. v 19, Gell. N.A. iv 2,
Prop. iv 5, 51, quorum titulus per barbara colla pependit). Sometimes a
titulus stating his offence was carried before a malefactor as a placard;
cf. Calig. 32, 2, Romae publico epulo servum ob detractam lectis argenteam
laminam carnifici confestim tradidit, ut manibus abscisis atque ante pectus
e collo pendentibus, praecedente titulo qui causam poenae indicaret, per
coetus epulantium circumduceretur.
impie: impietas (ἀσέβεια, Dio) was synonymous with maiestas, lèsemajesté, high treason; cf. Tac. A. vi 47, defertur impietatis in principет.
See on "pietas,” Vitell. 3, 1. Domitian claimed to be a deus (c. 13, 2).
The incident in the amphitheatre is referred to in Plin. Pan. 33 (contrasting
Trajan with Domitian): Iam, quam libera spectantium studia, quam
securus favor! Nemini impietas, ut solebat, obiecta, quod odisset gladiatorem: nemo, e spectatore spectaculum factus, miseras voluptates unco et
ignibus expiavit. Demens ille, verique honoris ignarus, qui crimina
maiestatis in arena colligebat, ac se despici et contemni, nisi etiam
gladiatores eius veneraremur, sibi male dici in illis, suam divinitatem,
suum numen violari interpretabatur:
cum se idem quod Deos, idem
gladiatores quod se putabat.
used the parma or
Martial, to please
parmularius: an adherent of the Thraeces who
parmula, a small round shield (see on Tit. 8, 2).
Domitian, disparages the Thraeces and their infrequent victories: xiv 213,
Haec quae saepe solet vinci, quae vincere raro, | parma tibi scutum
pumilionis erit: ix 68, 7, Mitior in magno clamor furit amphitheatro |
vincenti parmae cum sua turba favet. Marcus Aurelius (Comm. i 5) prides
himself on his impartiality between the two kinds of shield in the arena and
the two colours in the circus, he having been taught to be μήτε πρασιανὸς
(= prasinus “green”) μήτε βενετιανός (= venetus "blue"), μήτε παλμουλάριος (parmularius) ἢ σκούταριος (scutarius, the scutum being carried by
murmillones). Quintilian (ii 11, 2) tells of a rhetorician more interested
in gladiators than in his own art, who, when asked whether he was a
follower of Theodorus or Apollodorus (founders of different schools of
rhetoric), replied that it was the Thraeces whom he followed: Alius percontanti, Theodoreus an Apollodoreus esset? Ego, inquit, parmularius sum.
§ 2. complures senatores interemit: cf. Dio lxvii 3, 11, 12: Eutrop.
vii 23, 2, interfecit nobilissimos e senatu: Oros. vii 10, 2, nobilissimos e
senatu invidiae simul et praedae causa alios palam interfecit alios in
exilium trusit ibique trucidari imperavit: Plin. Pan. 48, domo, quam nuper
illa immanissima belua (Domitian) plurimo terrore munierat, cum nunc
propinquorum sanguinem lamberet, nunc se ad clarissimorum civium strages
caedesque proferret: Juv. iv 151, tempora saevitiae, claras quibus abstulit
urbi | inlustresque animas impune et vindice nullo. Tacitus (Agr. 44) says
that Domitian's savagery reached its climax in the years after Agricola's
death (93 A.D.): postremum illud tempus, quo Domitianus non iam per
intervalla ac spiramenta temporum, sed continuo et velut uno ictu rem
publicam exhausit.
Civicam Cerealem: this is the C. Vettulenus Civica Cerealis mentioned
in a military diploma (Dessau 1995) as legatus of Moesia in 82 A.D. He
was put to death by Domitian while he held the proconsulship of Asia
(c. 88 A.D.); cf. Tac. Agr. 42, where his fate is referred to as furnishing
a warning to Agricola not to accept the proconsulship when his turn came:
Aderat iam annus, quo proconsulatum Africae et Asiae sortiretur, et occiso
Civica nuper nec Agricolae consilium deerat nec Domitiano exemplum (i.e.
a precedent for doing away with Agricola).
Salvidienum Orfitum: consul (suffectus) under the Flavians, year unknown. Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vii 8 and 33, viii 7) says that
Apollonius of Tyana, when he appeared before Domitian on the charge
of conspiracy, maintained that Orfitus was just and temperate, averse from
wealth, sluggish by nature, and no more capable of revolutionary designs
than Apollonius' friend Nerva, the future emperor, who also was suspected
by Domitian of intriguing against him. Orfitus and Rufus (who was
alleged to be a fellow-conspirator) were banished to islands. Nerva was
commanded to dwell at Tarentum. Apollonius was acquitted. Ser.
Cornelius Scipio Salvidienus Orfitus, consul in 51, executed by Nero (Ner.
37), was probably the father of the (Ser. Cornelius Scipio) Salvidienus Orfitus
mentioned here; and two consuls of the same name in 110 and 149 were
probably his son and grandson.
Acilium Glabrionem: Manius Acilius Glabrio, who was consul along
with Trajan in 91 A.D.
The same portents appeared to them when they
entered upon the consulship, predicting destruction for Glabrio but empire
for Trajan (Dio lxvii 12). Glabrio's premature death is referred to in
Juv. iv 94 sqq., where he is mentioned as hastening along with his father
(aged about 80) to Domitian's consilium at his Alban fortress: properabat
Acilius | cum iuvene (= filio) indigno, quem mors tam saeva maneret |
et domini gladiis tam festinata. On the occasion of the Iuvenalia Domitian
compelled him, though consul, to fight as a venator against a huge lion
in the amphitheatre at the arx Albana; Glabrio dexterously despatched the
lion, and according to Dio (lxvii 14) it was chiefly Domitian's jealousy of
his skill in the arena which led to his exile and then to his death in 95 A.D.
That Glabrio was also charged with "impiety" in the form of Judaism
or Christianity seems a necessary inference from the words of Dio, who,
after mentioning that several, including Flavius Clemens (see с. 15, 1),
were condemned on this charge, goes on to say: τὸν δὲ δὴ Γλαβρίωνα . . .
κατηγορηθέντα τά τε ἄλλα καὶ οἷα οἱ πολλοὶ καὶ ὅτι καὶ θηρίοις ἐμάχετο, ἀπέκτεινεν.
See von Rohden in Pauly-Wissowa, i 267. Hardy (Studies in Rom. Hist.
p. 67) says: “archaeological discoveries have now established the fact that
the family of the Acilii Glabriones were buried in a crypt, the centre of a
series of catacombs clustered round the tomb of some saint or martyr,
whom, considering the evidence of Dio Cassius, it is not altogether rash
to identify with the Acilius Glabrio of Domitian." Cf. Ramsay, The
Church in the Roman Empire p. 262.
quasi: causal, see on Tit. 5, 1.
molitores rerum novarum: though Suetonius uses the phrase res novas
moliri several times (e.g. Galb. 11, Dom. 7, 3), he only uses the subst.
molitor here; he coins a fem. molitrix in Ner. 35, 4, Antoniam Claudi
filiam quasi molitricem novarum rerum interemit. For molitor cf. Sen.
Tranq. 7, maximorum molitores scelerum: Tac. A. xi 29, Appianae caedis
molitor Narcissus: Cic. Univ. 5, effector mundi molitorque Deus.
Aelium Lamiam: whose wife (Domitia Longina) Domitian took away
and married; see c. 1, 3.
laudanti: Domitian himself may have praised Lamia's voice, or
someone else in the presence of Domitian.
eutacto: i.e. εὐτακτῶ, disciplinam servo, continenter vivo, Venere
abstineo. Gronovius correctly explained the jest of Lamia: "Non mirari
te oportet me bene canere: servo enim disciplinam: et, ut servare possim,
tu fecisti uxore abducta"; he aptly cites Aelian, V.H. iii 30, ᾿Αμοιβεὺς ὁ
κιθαρῳδὸς σωφρονέστατος ἐλέγετο καὶ γυναῖκα ὡραιοτάτην ἔχων μὴ ὁμιλεῖν αὐτῇ.
For εὐτακτεῖν of obeying a trainer's regulations cf. Epictet. Ench. xxix 2,
θέλεις Ὀλύμπια νικῆσαι; . δεῖ σ' εὐτακτεῖν, ἀναγκοτροφεῖν, κ.τ.λ. A trainer
for singing and declamation was called phonascus (φωνασκός), e.g. Aug. 84, 2;
Ner. 25, 3.
μὴ καὶ σὺ γαμῆσαι θέλεις ; : Lamia's first wife had been carried off by
Domitian, and so he sarcastically suggests that Titus, in recommending
him to marry again, was looking forward to carrying off the second wife
as his bride.
§ 3. Salvium Cocceianum: his full name was Lucius Salvius Otho
Cocceianus (C.I.L. vi 2002; Plutarch, Oth. 16, erroneously calls him
Κοκκήιος); he was the son of L. Salvius Otho Titianus, who was brother of
the emperor Otho (see Oth. 1, 3, n.). Tacitus (H. ii 48) describes how Otho
on the eve of his suicide comforted his nephew Salvius Cocceianus, concluding with the words "proinde erecto animo capesseret vitam neu patruum
sibi Othonem fuisse aut oblivisceretur umquam aut nimium meminisset."
Cf. Plut. l.c., Suet. Oth. 10, 2. Cocceianus neglected this wise advice, and
the suspicious mind of Domitian interpreted the nephew's celebrations of
his dead uncle's birthday as a sign that he too was cherishing hopes of
empire.
Othonis imperatoris
diem natalem: April 28; see Oth. 2, 1. The
birthday of Julius Caesar became a State festival after his death (Dio xlvii
18). Dio mentions the celebrations of the birthdays of the emperors
Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Vitellius, Titus, Hadrian, Commodus, Severus,
and Geta; such celebrations being doubtless continued after their death
in so far as they were not specially forbidden. Domitian forbade memorial
games on the birthday of Titus (Dio lxvii 2); so too Caracalla in the case
of Geta (Dio lxxvii 12). See Marquardt, Staatsv. iii² 268, n. 10.
Mettium Pompusianum: for the different way in which Vespasian
treated Pompusianus and his imperatoria genesis see Vesp. 14. Dio (lxvii
12) says that Domitian first banished him to Corsica and afterwards put
him to death.
quod ferebatur: the indic. is used, though quod circumferret,
quodque..indidisset follows, because it is a compressed form of expression
representing quod, ut ferebatur (ferebant), haberet imperatoriam genesim;
see on quod constabat, Tit. 7, 1. In giving the reasons for the different
executions the construction varies between the indie. (quod dixerat,
quodque responderat, quod celebraverat) and the subjunct. (in this
and the following clauses); the indic. expressing the writer's statements of
facts, the subjunct. expressing the considerations actuating Domitian
(Trachmann, op. cit. p. 26).
depictum orbem terrae in membrana: Dio (lxvii 12) describes the
map which Pompusianus had, not as a portable parchment, but as a painting
on the walls of his bed-chamber (τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐν τοῖς τοῦ κοιτῶνος τοίχοις
εἶχεν ἐγγεγραμμένην). It would be a general map of the world such as
those referred to in Prop. iv 3, 37, Cogor et e tabulis pictos ediscere mundos,
and Vitruv. viii 2, 6, capita fluminum, quae orbe terrarum chorographiis
picta itemque scripta inveniuntur. Maps were frequently painted on
the walls of porticoes; e.g. the map of Italy in the temple of Tellus at
Rome (Varr. R.R. i 2), and the map of the Roman Empire painted (7 A.D.)
in the portico of Polla, sister of Agrippa, at Rome (Plin. N.H. iii 3,
Dio lv 8). Pompusianus was not put to death merely for having a map
in his possession, but for using it to aid his alleged treasonable designs
by studying the points at which the Empire could best be attacked, or by
acquiring a knowledge which would be essential to him when emperor.
contiones. ex Tito Livio: Quintilian praises Livy as “in contionibus
supra quam enarrari potest eloquens” (x 1, 101); he also recommends to
the orator the study of the contiones in the historians (iii 8, 67). Twice
elsewhere Suetonius mentions Livy, telling us that he encouraged the
youthful Claudius to write a history (Claud. 41, 1), and that Caligula
was very near removing his writings and busts from all the libraries,
censuring him as a long-winded and careless historian: ut verbosum in
historia neglegentemque carpebat (Calig. 34, 2).
Magonis et Hannibalis: the Carthaginian general Mago, son of
Hamilcar Barca, was the youngest brother of Hannibal and accompanied
him in the Carthaginian invasion of Italy in 218 B.C. at the beginning of
the second Punic war.
Sallustium Lucullum: the name appears as C. Sallustius Lucullus in
a spurious inscription, Eph. Epigr. vii 1185.* He was one of the successors
of Agricola as legatus of Britain, for the predecessors of Agricola are
named by Tacitus, and so his command must have been at some period
between 84 (when Agricola left Britain) and 96 (when Domitian died).
The reason given by Suetonius for his execution was probably only a
part of a more general charge of inciting the army in Britain to revolt
from Domitian.
lanceas Luculleas: Domitian may have thought that these lances
should have been called after him as head of the army (Bremi). For the
naming of weapons after individuals cf. Δρουσιανὰ ξίφη (Dio lvii 13; see
note on "ferramenta,” Tit. 9, 2). Iphicrates, an Athenian general, invented a new sort of military boots or leggings called after him ᾿Ιφικρατίδες.
Iunium Rusticum: Quintus (?) Iunius Arulenus Rusticus was an unflinching adherent of the Stoic school and a pupil of Thrasea Paetus. As
tribunus plebis in '66 A.D. he wished to use his veto (intercessio) on the
senate's condemnation of Thrasea, but Thrasea forbade him, as it would
not save his life and it would involve the death of Rusticus (Tac. A. xvi 26,
where Rusticus is described as a flagrans iuvenis, actuated “cupidine
laudis''). He was praetor in 69, and was one of the envoys sent by
Vitellius and the senate to the forces of Vespasian which were advancing
on Rome, but they received him with derision and even wounded him (Tac.
H. iii 80; cf. Vitell. 16). In 93 he was condemned by the senate for
treason to Domitian and was executed. The younger Pliny was a warm
admirer of his (see Ep. i 14, ii 18, iii 11). For the difficulty in determining his praenomen see Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii 233. Both Tacitus
and Pliny call him Rusticus Arulenus or Arulenus Rusticus or simply
Rusticus.
Paeti Thraseae: P. Clodius Thrasea Paetus, who took the younger
Cato as a model (cf. Plut. Cat. min. 25, 37), put his Stoical principles into
practice by the stubborn opposition which he offered in the senate to Nero's
tyrannous conduct. He was consul (suffectus) in 56. In 63 he was
excluded from the receptions of Nero, and for the next three years he
took no part in public life; his retirement, however, did not placate Nero's
animosity, and in 66, after the conspiracy of Piso and the many executions
which followed it, Nero 'aspired to extirpate Virtue itself” (virtutem ipsam
exscindere concupivit) by putting to death Thrasea Paetus and his friend
Barea Soranus (Tac. A. xvi 21). Thrasea was condemned for treason, and
was only allowed to choose the manner of his death. Tacitus enumerates
the various charges brought against him at his trial; Suetonius (Ner. 37,
1) says that Nero charged him with having a "dour and pedagogic look”
(tristior et paedagogi vultus). The full form of his name was learned
from a tablet found at Pompeii (Mommsen, Hermes xii 128).
Helvidi Prisci: son-in-law of Thrasea Paetus; for his career and
character see on Vesp. 15. If the text here is sound, Suetonius seems
inaccurate in attributing the panegyric on him to Junius Rusticus, for
Tacitus, Pliny, and Dio say that it was composed by Herennius Senecio:
Tac. Agr. 2, Legimus, cum Aruleno Rustico Paetus Thrasea, Herennio
Senecioni Priscus Helvidius laudati essent, capitale fuisse, neque in ipsos
modo auctores, sed in libros quoque eorum saevitum, delegato triumviris
(capitalibus) ministerio ut monumenta clarissimorum ingeniorum in comitio
ac foro urerentur: Plin. Ep. vii 19, cum Senecio reus esset, quod de vita
Helvidi libros composuisset: Dio lxvii 13, τὸν γὰρ δὴ ῾Ρούστικον τὸν ᾿Αρουλῆνον
ἀπέκτεινεν (ὁ Δομιτιανός) ὅτι ἐφιλοσόφει καὶ ὅτι τὸν Θρασέαν ἱερὸν (= sanctissimum, Suet.) ὠνόμαζε, καὶ ῾Ερέννιον Σενεκίωνα... ὅτι τοῦ Πρίσκου τοῦ ῾Ἑλουιδίου
τὸν βίον συνέγραψεν. Macé (Suétone, p. 413) proposed to insert Herennium
Senecionem quod before Helvidi, and to read the pl. edidissent appellassentque, thinking that the copyist jumped from HErennium to HElvidi,
and that later a corrector changed the verbs to the sing. in agreement
with the only subject which was left. Janssen would force the text into
meaning that Rusticus wrote a biography of Thrasea Paetus and not of
Helvidius Priscus, but that in this biography he described both of them
as sanctissimi viri.
philosophos
summovit: Dio (l.c.), ἄλλοι τε ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς ταύτης τῆς
κατὰ τὴν φιλοσοφίαν αἰτίας συχνοὶ διώλοντο, καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ πάντες ἐξηλάθησαν
αὖθις ἐκ τῆς ῾Ρώμης: Tac. (l.c.), Scilicet illo igne (i.e. the burning of the
panegyrics on Thrasea Paetus and Helvidius Priscus) vocem populi Romani
et libertatem senatus et conscientiam generis humani aboleri arbitrabantur,
expulsis insuper sapientiae professoribus atque omni bona arte in exilium
acta, ne quid usquam honestum occurreret. This expulsion of philosophers
took place in 93 A.D. Pliny (Ep. iii 11) describes the risks which he as
praetor incurred in that year (cum essent philosophi ab urbe summoti) by
lending aid to the philosopher Artemidorus: atque haec feci, cum septem
amicis meis aut occisis aut relegatis, occisis Senecione, Rustico, Helvidio,
relegatis Maurico, Gratilla, Arria, Fannia, tot circa me iactis fulminibus
quasi ambustus mihi quoque impendere idem exitium certis quibusdam notis
augurarer. Among those banished was Epictetus, "That halting slave,
who in Nicopolis Taught Arrian, when Vespasian's brutal son Cleared
Rome of what most shamed him" (M. Arnold). The Armenian version
of Eusebius (p. 160, Schoene) dates the expulsion correctly in the year
Oct. 92-Sept. 93; Hieronymus puts it two years later (94–95) ‘“Domitianus
rursum philosophos et mathematicos Roma per edictum extrusit," and
mentions an earlier expulsion by Domitian, not known otherwise, in the
year Oct. 88-Sept. 89 ‘mathematicos et philosophos Romanos urbe pepulit,”
which Furneaux-Anderson on Tac. l.c. suggest may arise from a confusion
with the expulsion under Vespasian (see on Vesp. 13) or may indicate
that a number of philosophers and astrologers were charged with complicity
in the revolt of L. Antonius Saturninus on the Rhine (Dom. 6, 2).
words ἐξηλάθησαν αὖθις in Dio (l.c.) seem to imply some earlier expulsion
by Domitian, and Janssen surmises that in 88-89 they were expelled from
Rome, in 93-95 from Italy.
The
§ 4. Helvidium filium: this Helvidius (Priscus), whose praenomen and
cognomen do not occur, was a son of Helvidius Priscus (see above) and a
stepson of Fannia. Pliny (Ep. ix 13) says that he lived in retirement
owing to the perils of the times (metu temporum nomen ingens, pares
virtutes secessu tegebat). Pliny speaks of him as consularis and he may
have been consul suffectus in Sept. 87 (Mommsen). When he was accused
by Domitian, the servile senate condemned him and even dragged him to
prison (nostrae duxere Helvidium in carcerem manus, Tac. Agr. 45). After
Domitian's death Pliny impeached Publicius Certus, a senator of praetorian
rank, who had been the principal supporter of the delatores against
Helvidius and had laid violent hands on Helvidius in the senate. Certus
escaped by a death so opportune as to suggest suicide, and Pliny afterwards published his speech de ultione Helvidi, which was modelled on that
of Demosthenes against Meidias (Ep. vii 30, cf. iv 21).
quasi: causal, see on Tit. 5, 1.
scaenico exodio: exodium (ἐξόδιον) denoted an after-piece, especially a
merry farce after a serious play, the actors being called exodiarii; cf. the
Schol. on Juv. iii 175: exodiarius apud veteres in fine ludorum intrabat,
qui ridiculus foret, ut quicquid lacrimarum atque tristitiae, quae exissent
ex tragicis affectibus, huiusce spectaculi risus detergeret. After the disappearance of the old saturae, the Atellanae and mimi were frequently
used for this purpose; hence Atellanicum exodium (Suet. Tib. 45), exodium
Atellanae (Juv. vi 71).
Paridis et Oenones: Oenone, the daughter of the river-god Cebren,
was the first wife of the Trojan Paris and was deserted by him for Helen.
After the capture of Troy and the recovery of Helen by the Greeks Paris
resought Oenone, that she might cure a wound which he had received from
an arrow of Philoctetes. Domitian suspected that his own separation from,
and subsequent reunion with, Domitia (c. 3, 1) and his passion for Julia
(c. 22), wife of Flavius Sabinus (see below), were burlesqued in the farce
of Helvidius. Furthermore, Paris happened to be the name of the paramour
of Domitia.
taxasset: see on retaxare in Vesp. 13.
...
Flavium Sabinum: T. Flavius Sabinus, son of the praefectus urbis
Flavius Sabinus, who was an elder brother of Vespasian (Vesp. 1, 3).
Like his cousin Domitian he escaped from the Capitol when it was stormed
by the Vitellians and his father was captured and slain (Tac. H. iii 69–73;
cf. Dom. 1, 2). Sabinus appears in the consular Fasti as consul ordinarius
for 82 A.D. along with the emperor Domitian, and their names are used
for dating that year in C.I.L. vi 3828, Dessau 6105: Imp. Domitiano
[Aug. viii] T. Flavio Sabi[no cos.] idibus Iu[n]
Presumably, therefore, Sabinus actually held the office at least for the earlier part of 82, so
that if the verbal slip on the part of the herald occurred in 81 when
Sabinus was designated as consul, his execution did not follow immediately
as one might naturally infer from the words of Suetonius. Possibly, as
Gsell (op. cit. 248) and others assume, the contretemps happened in some
later year when Sabinus was designated consul for a second time but
was executed before entering on the office. See Stein in Pauly-Wissowa, vi
2614 sq. Sabinus was married to Julia, daughter of the emperor Titus,
and on his death Domitian took Julia as his mistress; cf. Philostr. vit.
Apollon. vii 7, Σαβῖνον ἀπεκτονώς, ἕνα τῶν ἑαυτοῦ συγγενῶν, Ἰουλίαν ἤγετο. ἡ δὲ
Ἰουλία γυνὴ μὲν ἦν τοῦ πεφονευμένου, Δομετιανοῦ δὲ ἀδελφιδῆ (“niece”), μία τῶν
Τίτου θυγατέρων. See c. 22.
alterum e patruelibus: the other cousin of Domitian was Flavius
Clemens (c. 15, 1), brother of the Flavius Sabinus mentioned here.
comitiorum consularium die: Tiberius took away from the people the
election of magistrates and transferred it to the senate (Tac. A. i 15, tum
primum e campo comitia ad patres translata sunt). In the days of the
Republic the announcement of the result (renuntiatio) was made by the
magistrate presiding over the comitia or by the voice of a herald (perhaps
by both); cf. Cic. Mur. 1, where Cicero says that he as presiding
consul announced the return of Murena (L. Murenam consulem renuntiavi) :
Gell. xii 8, censores illi voce praeconis renuntiati sunt. Though in
14 A.D. the people were deprived of any active part in the elections, they
20
still assembled as comitia centuriata or tributa to hear the formal announcement of the result of the voting in the senate (Dio lviii 20), and this
custom continued down to the 3rd cent. A.D.
destinatum: for destinare = designare cf. Dom. 15, 1: Tib. 31: Iul. 1,
1; Calig. 12, 1; it is used in this sense by Livy first. On designations to
the consulship under the Empire see Mommsen, Staatsr. i³ 588.
=
perperam : imprudenter, per errorem; cf. Plaut. Most. 968, ne ad
alias aedes perperam deveneris: Auct. Bell. Hisp. 12, Tabellarii, qui ad
Pompeium missi erant, perperamque ad castra nostra pervenerant: Varr.
R.R. i 69, perperam facere "to make a mistake."
§ 5. civilis belli: the revolt of L. Antonius Saturninus in Upper
Germany (c. 6, 2).
quaestionis: see on c. 8, 4.
immisso per obscaena igne: cf. Apul. Met. vii 28, ardentem titionem
(= facem) gerens mediis inguinibus obtrudit: x 24, titione candenti inter
media femora detruso crudelissime necavit.
manus
nonnullis manus amputavit: cf. Galb. 9, 1, nummulario
amputavit. This verb (= circumsecare, circumcidere) in Cicero means to
prune trees; in the sense of cutting off parts of the body it occurs in
Lucilius, but not in class. Lat.
tribunum: Julius Calvaster; cf. Dio lxvii 11, eἷς δ᾽ οὖν τις νεανίσκος
Ιούλιος Κάλουαστρος κεχιλιαρχηκὼς ἐς βουλείας ἐλπίδα (i.e. he had held the
military tribuneship in the hope of becoming a senator) παραδοξότατα ἐσώθη.
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ πολλάκις κατὰ μόνας συμμεμιχὼς (τῷ ᾿Αντωνίῳ) ἠλέγχετο, καὶ οὐκ εἶχεν
ὅπως ἄλλως τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς συνωμοσίας ἀπολύσηται, ἔφη κατ' ἐρωτικὴν χρείαν αὐτῷ
συγγεγονέναι· καὶ γὰρ ἦν οἷος ἐρᾶσθαι δύνασθαι. καὶ ὁ μὲν οὕτως ἀφείθη.
laticlavium: a tribune of senatorial birth and entitled to wear the
tunica laticlavia, for which see on Vesp. 2, 2. The tribunes of the legion
were young men preparing for either a senatorial or an equestrian career.
Those of equestrian birth were called tribuni angusticlavii, e.g. the father
of Suetonius (Oth. 10, 1). A year's service as tribune was sufficient
military qualification for entering on the political cursus honorum of
senators; but those qualifying for the equestrian cursus usually had to
serve as praefectus cohortis, tribunus legionis, and praefectus alae (Parker,
Rom. Legions, p. 189).
culpae: i.e. the guilt of treasonable conspiracy.
impudicos: see on Vesp. 13. In the reign of Claudius, during the
executions which followed the downfall of Messalina in 48 A.D., Caesoninus
escaped the death-penalty by the same shameful defence; cf. Tac. A. xi 36,
Suillio Caesonino et Plautio Laterano mors remittitur, huic ob patrui
egregium meritum: Caesoninus vitiis protectus est, tamquam in illo foedissimo coetu passus muliebria.
CHAPTER 11.
callidae inopinataeque saevitiae: Dio lxvii 1, Δομιτιανὸς δὲ ἦν μὲν καὶ
θρασὺς καὶ ὀργίλος, ἦν δὲ καὶ ἐπίβουλος καὶ κρυψίνους, ὥστε ἀφ᾽ ἑκατέρων τῶν μὲν· τὸ
προπετὲς τῶν δὲ τὸ δόλιον ἔχων, πολλὰ μὲν ὥσπερ σκηπτός (instar fulminis)
ὀξέως ἐμπίπτων τισὶν ἐλυμαίνετο, πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἐκ παρασκευῆς ἐκακούργει ....
ἐπλάττετο δὲ ἀγαπᾶν ἀεὶ ὃν ἀεὶ μάλιστα ἀποσφάξαι ἤθελεν. The treacherous
smoothness and blandness (like the "placidi pellacia ponti'") of emperors
such as Domitian (and Tiberius) is denounced by Pliny, Pan. 66, Erant
sub oculis naufragia multorum, quos insidiosa tranquillitate provectos
improvisus turbo perculerat. Quod enim tam infidum mare quam blanditiae
principum illorum, quibus tanta levitas (al. lenitas), tanta fraus, ut facilius
esset iratos quam propitios cavere? Cf. also the description in Tac. Agr. 39
of the way in which Domitian "fronte laetus, pectore anxius” disguised
his hatred of Agricola. The gruesome humour he displayed in the treatment of his destined victims is compared by Henderson (Five Roman
Emperors p. 19) with that of Louis XI described in Quentin Durward.
actorem summarum: = actorem in rationibus (C.I.L. v 8237), a steward,
cashier, accountant, who would be a slave or at most a freedman. Sometimes, as here, actor is followed by a defining genitive, cf. actor praedii,
fundi, bonorum, rerum; more frequently it is used absolutely for a
"manager." The varieties of actores are enumerated by Marquardt,
Privatl.2 139; see also Mayor on Plin. Ep. iii 19.
pridie quam: in pre-class. and class. Lat. with perf. indic.; in Livy
and later writers with the subjunct. (always imperf. in Suet., cf.
с. 16, 1).
cruci figeret: see on c. 10, 1.
assidere in toro iuxta: a very high honour; to sit unbidden on an
emperor's seat was to court death: cf. Spart. Hadr. 23, Servianum quasi
adfectatorem imperii
quod in sedili regio iuxta lectum posito sedisset
mori coegit.
..
partibus de cena dignatus est: sending food from the royal table to
absent friends was an honour shown by the Persian kings; cf. Xen.
Anab. i 9, where Cyrus is said to have sent half-eaten geese and half
loaves to his friends. Other references to the custom under Roman emperors
are in Spart. Caracalla 3, fratrem patruelem Afrum, cui pridie partes de
cena miserat, iussit occidi: Capitol. Pertinax 12, amicis si quando de
prandio suo mittere voluit, misit offulas binas, aut omasi partem, aliquando
lumbos gallinaceos. “pars" was the regular word for a "portion" or
"helping" of a dish; cf. Suet. Calig. 18, qua epulatione equiti Romano
contra se hilarius avidiusque vescenti partes suas misit: Petron. Satyr. 33,
ego quidem paene proieci partem meam.
Arrecinum Clementem: Marcus Arrecinus Clemens, brother of Arrecina
Tertulla the first wife of Titus (Tit. 4, 2). He was consul (suffectus) in
73 A.D., and again under Domitian (year uncertain) along with L. Baebius
Honoratus (C.I.L. xii 3637). In 70 A.D. he was appointed by Mucianus to
be prefect of the praetorian guards, an office held by his father under
Caligula; cf. Tac. H. iv 68, Utque Domitiani animum.. deleniret, Arrecinum
Clementem, domui Vespasiani per adfinitatem innexum et gratissimum
202
Domitiano, praetorianis praeposuit, patrem eius sub C. Caesare egregie
functum ea cura dictitans. His appointment to this post was quite exceptional, as he was a senator and not an eques; see on Tit. 6, 1.
emissariis: emissarius meant a scout, spy, or secret agent, especially
for the purpose of securing materials for accusations; cf. Galb. 15, 2, ex
omnibus Neronis emissariis maleficentissimos: Cic. Verr. ii 22, Itaque
apponit, qui petat Veneri Erycinae illam hereditatem. Petit Naevius
Turpio quidam, istius excursor et emissarius, homo omnium ex illo conventu quadruplatorum (= delatorum) deterrimus: v 108, quem iste
in rebus capitalibus in omni calumnia praecursorem habere solebat et
emissarium: Cic. Fam. viii 8, de vi reus a quodam suo emissario Sex.
Tettio factus.
...
simul gestanti: for such gestatio or riding in a litter (the lectica held
two) or carriage see on Vesp. 21. Verbs like gestor and vehor come under
the head of those passives which Kühner-Stegmann (i 105, 108) call
"deponential" passives, differing from ordinary passives in having a
present participle and a gerund; cf. Galb. 8, 1, ne ad gestandum quidem
iter ingressus: Ulp. Dig. vii 8, 12, gestandi ius: Gaius Dig. xl 2, 7, сит
gestandi gratia prodierit: Suet. Claud. 28, lectica per urbem vehendi ius:
Gell. v 6, 27, equo vehens: Cic. Brut. 331, adulescentiam per medias laudes
quasi quadrigis vehentem: Cic. N.D. i 78, Triton natantibus invehens beluis.
§2. contemptius: comparative of contemptim “contemptuously," not
of contempte "contemptibly"; see Thes. Ling. Lat. iv 655.
abuteretur patientia: cf. Cic. Cat. i 1, Quousque tandem abutere,
Catilina, patientia nostra?
tristiorem sententiam: “an especially severe sentence"; cf. Liv. viii
21, 2, interrogatus a quodam tristioris sententiae auctore, quam pоепат
meritos Privernates censeret: Ov. M. xv 43, Tunc quoque sic lata est
sententia tristis, et omnis | calculus inmitem demittitur ater in urnam.
as
non certius atrocis exitus signum: Baumg.-Cr. explains exitus here
“finis vitae, mors," and Rolfe translates "no more certain indication
of a cruel death," but exitus means the "ending" of Domitian's judgement as opp. to principium; cf. Cic. Imp. Pomp. 1, 3, huius orationis
difficilius est exitum quam principium invenire.
more maiorum puniendi condemnarentur: cf. Ner. 49, 12, where Nero
on his flight from Rome learns that he has been condemned by the senate
as a public enemy (hostis) and sentenced to be punished more maiorum;
he inquires the nature of the punishment, and is told "nudi hominis
cervicem inseri furcae, corpus virgis ad necem caedi"; when he hears the
horsemen approaching to arrest him, he stabs himself. Claudius on one
occasion when he was at Tibur wished to witness an antiqui moris supplicium,
but no executioner could be found after the criminals had been tied to
the stake; he sent for one from Rome and continued to wait for him until
nightfall (Claud. 34, 1). On the antiquity of this punishment see Mommsen,
Strafr. 916 sqq. puniendi is the gerund, and more maiorum puniendi = ad
poenam (supplicium) antiqui moris “condemned to the old-fashioned method
of punishing"; for the double gen. with more cf. Cic. Brut. 163, Scaevolae
dicendi elegantia. The gerundive with condemnare is found only in Rufin.
Hist. 5, 1, quem
praeparandum bestiis condemnavit; with damnare in
Ulp. Dig. xlviii 19, 3: 24, 1.
§ 3. intercessit: in virtue of his tribunician power (Tit. 6, 1, n.) the
emperor possessed the right of vetoing a decree of the senate (Mommsen,
Staatsr. ii³ 879). Tacitus mentions two cases of an emperor interposing
his veto where the senate had decreed the punishment "more maiorum'':
A. iv 30, dictis sententiis ut Serenus more maiorum puniretur, quo molliret
invidiam, (Tiberius) intercessit: A. xvi 11, decretum ut more maiorum
punirentur, at Nero mortem sine arbitro (= liberum mortis arbitrium) permittens intercessit. Cf. also A. xiv 48, where Nero hopes for an opportunity
of using his intercessio tribunicia in the event of Antistius being condemned by the senate to this penalty.
ab re: = alienum, lit. "away from the matter in hand," and so "unprofitable" "useless," opposed to in rem or ex re; cf. Aug. 94, 1, non ab re
fuerit subtexere quae ei prius quam nasceretur ... evenerint : Liv. xxxv 32,
non ab re esse Quinctio visum est sociorum aliquos legatos interesse ei
consilio. This use of ab re is nearly confined to negative sentences; see
Kühner-Stegmann, i 493.
pietate: loyalty" to the emperor; see on Vitell. 3, 1: Dom. 10, 1..
difficulter: as though the senators themselves were eager to punish
any alleged maiestas with the severest penalties of the law, and were not
merely obeying the dictates of the tyrant. Tacitus says that Nero spared
the senate the humiliation of his being present to witness them passing
shameful sentences, whereas Domitian loved to be present and to gloat
over their servility: Agr. 45, Nero tamen subtraxit oculos suos iussitque
scelera, non spectavit: praecipua sub Domitiano miseriarum pars erat
videre et aspici, cum suspiria nostra subscriberentur, cum denotandis tot
hominum palloribus sufficeret saevus ille vultus et rubor, quo se contra
pudorem muniebat.
parcetis oculis vestris: parcere oculis meant to avoid unpleasant or
unlawful sights"; cf. Prop. iv 9, 53, parce oculis, hospes, lucoque abscede
verendo: Tibull. i 2, 33, parcite luminibus,
celari vult sua furta Venus.
Contrast pascere oculos in Vitell. 14, 2.
...
intellegent: from the fact that the senate had decreed such a “mild"
penalty.
CHAPTER 12.
exhaustus: like Nero; cf. Ner. 32, 1, destitutus atque ita iam exhaustus
et egens ut stipendia quoque militum et commoda (rewards or bounties)
veteranorum protrahi ac differri necesse esset, calumniis rapinisque intendit
animum; also like Caligula; cf. Calig. 38, 1, exhaustus igitur atque egens
ad rapinas convertit animum vario et exquisitissimo calumniarum et
auctionum et vectigalium genere.
stipendio quod adiecerat: see c. 7, 3.
militum numerum deminuere: cf. Zonar. xi 19, μεταμεληθεὶς δὲ τὴν μὲν
ποσότητα (i.e. the amount of pay) οὐκ ἐμείωσε, τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τῶν στρατευομένων
συνέστειλε· καὶ ἑκατέρωθεν μεγάλα τὸ δημόσιον ἔβλαψε, μήθ' ἱκανοὺς τοὺς ἀμύνοντας
αὐτῷ, καὶ τούτους μεγαλομίσθους ποιήσας.
obnoxium se barbaris: obnoxius (= noxae expositus, damno subiectus)
is a favourite word with Suetonius in the sense of "exposed to"; e.g.
Aug. 28, 3, Urbem inundationibus incendiisquc obnoxiam: Tib. 63, 1, contumeliis obnoxius: Tib. 54, 2, omnium criminationibus obnoxios reddidit:
Iul. 45, 2, obtrectatorum iocis obnoxiam expertus calvitii (“baldness'")
deformitatem. He once uses it absolutely in the sense of humilis, demissus,
"subservient”: Tib. 12, 2, non privatum modo, sed etiam obnoxium et
trepidum egit; cf. Cic. ad Brut. i 17, 6, supplex et obnoxius.
neque eo setius: see on Tit. 5, 3.
nihil pensi habuit: cf. Ner. 34, 1, neque in divexanda (matre) quicquam pensi habuit: Sall. Cat. 5, neque id quibus modis assequeretur
quicquam pensi habebat: Liv. xxvi 15, 4, quibus neque quid dicerent neque
quid facerent quicquam pensi fuisset. In these phrases pensum means
what is weighed or considered, and the partitive genitive depends on nihil
or quicquam; in Tac. A. xiii 15, neque fas neque fidem pensi habere, the
gen. is a gen. of price or value (so too in Val. Max. ii 9, 3, non pensi
ducere). See Kühner-Stegmann, i 457, ii 262; Roby Lat. Gr. 1301 (where
it is suggested that Tac. misunderstood the construction of the phrase).
praedaretur omni modo: cf. Pliny's contrast between Domitian and
Trajan, Pan. 41, Nam quid est causae cur aliis quidem, cum omnia raperent
et rapta retinerent, ut si nihil rapuissent, nihil retinuissent, defuerint
omnia: tibi, cum tam multa largiaris et nihil auferas, omnia supersint?
Numquam principibus defuerunt qui fronte gravi et tristi supercilio utilitatibus fisci contumaciter adessent, et erant principes ipsi sua sponte avidi
et rapaces et qui magistris non egerent, plura tamen semper a nobis contra
nos didicerunt.
adversus maiestatem principis: cf. Ner. 32, 2, instituit (Nero) ut
lege maiestatis facta dictaque omnia, quibus modo delator non deesset,
tenerentur. Tacitus (A. iii 38) says that under Tiberius the maiestatis
crimen was the complementum (“makeweight'') omnium accusationum.
The abuse of the charge of maiestas to enrich the Treasury under Domitian
is denounced in Plin. Pan. 42: Locupletabant et fiscum et aerarium non
tam Voconiae et Iuliae leges quam maiestatis singulare et unicum crimen
eorum qui crimine vacarent. Huius tu (i.e. Trajan) metum penitus
sustulisti. For the various offences made indictable under the law of
maiestas see Furneaux, Tac. Ann. Vol. i² p. 141.
§ 2. confiscabantur: = in fiscum redigebantur. The verb confiscare (cf.
publicare, δημεύειν) is first found in Suetonius, either c. acc. pers., e.g.
Calig. 41, 2, duos equites R. locupletes corripi confiscarique iussit (so
Cic. dom. 8, cum lege nefaria Ptolemaeum publicasses), or c. acc. rei, as
here and in Calig. 16, 3, sestertium milies confiscatum; he also uses it of
money kept in the emperor's “fiscus” (Vesp. 16, 3, n.) as opposed to the
“aerarium publicum': Aug. 101, 2, quam summam confiscatam semper
repositamque habuerat.
..
alienissimae hereditates: the estates of those who were in no way
related to the emperor, and to which the fiscus had not the slightest
claim (see on fiscales calumniae, c. 9, 3). Contrast Domitian's earlier
scrupulousness in the matter of inheritances (c. 9, 2). Pliny (Pan. 43)
with epigrammatic neatness and sting describes him as “unus omnium,
nunc quia scriptus, nunc quia non scriptus, heres.”
uno
qui diceret audisse: cf. Calig. 38, 2, testamenta primipilarium,
qui ab initio Tiberi principatus neque illum neque se heredem reliquissent,
ut ingrata rescidit; item ceterorum (testamenta) ut irrita et vana quoscumque quis diceret herede Caesare mori destinasse.
praeter ceteros
acerbissime: for the pleonasm cf. Galb. 9, 1, multo
praeter ceteras altiorem.. crucem: Vitell. 13, 2, famosissima super ceteras
cena.
Iudaicus fiscus: in inscriptions of the early Empire fiscus is thus used
as a name for the imperial exchequer (or central chest) of separate
provinces or finance departments; e.g. fiscus Asiaticus (C.I.L. vi 8570),
Gallicus (vi 5197), frumentarius (vi 544); cf. Suet. Aug. 101, quantum
pecuniae in aerario et fiscis et vectigaliorum residuis. Jewish communities,
wherever they might be situated, were in the habit of levying a didrachm
(half-shekel) each year from every adult male Jew to increase the treasures
of the Temple at Jerusalem. The sums collected were centralised and
exported in gold by trusted agents to Jerusalem (Philo Leg. ad Gaium 23).
This export of gold roused opposition in the Greek towns and also in Italy
where the Roman senate on several occasions forbade all export of gold,
and the propraetor Flaccus confiscated the sums collected for the Temple
by the communities in Asia Minor (Cic. Flac. 28). Julius Caesar issued
edicts, confirmed by Augustus, authorizing anew the sending of these gifts to
Jerusalem from Rome and the provinces, and when the cities of Asia Minor
and Cyrene made a show of opposition, Agrippa intervened in favour of
the Jews (Joseph. Ant. Iud. xvi 16, Phil. Leg. 40). After the fall of
Jerusalem and the destruction of the Temple in 70 A.D. this annual tribute
was transferred to Jupiter Capitolinus and to his earthly representative
the Roman emperor (Mommsen, Prov. Rom. Emp. ii 217; cf. Dio lxvi 7,
Joseph. Bell. Iud. vii 6, 6, Mart. vii 55). All the circumcised were bound
to register their names, and there were procurators to collect this capitation
tax (procuratores ad capitularia Iudaeorum, C.I.L. vi 8604).
abolished the abuses and "delations" connected with it under Domitian,
as is shown by coins of his with the inscription fisci Iudaici calumnia
sublata, but the tax itself was still being levied at the beginning of the
3rd cent.; cf. Orig. Ep. ad Afr. 14, καὶ νῦν ᾿Ιουδαίων τὸ δίδραχμον αὐτοῖς (τοῖς
Ῥωμαίοις) τελούντων. Julian (c. 360 A.D.) forbade exactions from the Jews
and destroyed the fiscal registers of their names (Julian Ep. 23). See
Daremberg-Saglio, iii 625; Hirschfeld, Kais. Verwaltungsb.2 p. 73.
Nerva
ad quem deferebantur: see on Vitell. 14, 4. The delatores (Tit. 8, 5)
gave information to the Treasury officials who controlled the Iudaicus
fiscus of attempts to evade payment by those who could be held liable.
qui vel inprofessi Iudaicam viverent vitam: vel inprofessi is a
correction by I. Fr. Gronovius of velut inprofessi (MG Υδ), veluti professi
(X). Gronovius interprets inprofessi as proselytes who were not of Jewish
extraction and so had not registered themselves on the fiscal register of
Jews, but who observed the Sabbath and various Jewish rites and
purifications; they are here distinguished from those who were born of
Jewish parents but disguised the fact to avoid the tax. Janssen follows
Bremi in taking inprofessi as referring especially to the Christians, the
Jews being referred to in the clause beginning vel dissimulata origine,
while others (e.g. Baumg.-Cr.) think that this latter clause refers to the
Christians, and that the inprofessi are proselytes to Judaism. The adj.
inprofessus is used in post-Aug. writers either in an active (or middle)
sense "not declaring oneself," as here and Dig. xxxix 4, 16, 1, si quis
inprofessus servus fuerit, or passively, e.g. Quintil. in lemm. Decl. 341, res
furtiva inprofessa apud publicanos. The words intra urbem, which are
found in some of the MSS. after Iudaicam, appear in the old editions but
were rightly rejected by Oudendorp as an explanatory gloss.
interfuisse memini: the pres. inf. might be expected as in Cic.
Rep. i 23, memini me admodum adulescentulo
perturbari exercitum
nostrum, but there are many instances even in Cicero of the perf. inf.
with memini to express a past event of which one was a witness or contemporary, and it is usual in post-class. Latin (Kühner-Stegmann, i 703).
me adulescentulum: in Ner. 57, 2 Suetonius says that twenty years
after the death of Nero (68 A.D.), "adulescente me,” there arose a false
Nero who won support in Parthia; thus he describes himself as an
adulescens in 88; but it is improbable that he is referring to any earlier
period here, adulescentulus being often a mere synonym of adulescens (e.g.
in Vesp. 8, 3). Bentley would omit me adulescentulum.
consilio: see on c. 8, 1.
circumsectus: = circumcisus, a very rare use, for which the only other
reference in the Thes. Ling. Lat. is Mar. Victorin. in Gal. 5, 12.
For
circumcision as the distinguishing mark of the Jews cf. Tac. H. v 5,
Circumcidere genitalia instituerunt, ut diversitate noscantur. Transgressi
(i.e. proselytes) in morem eorum idem usurpant, nec quicquam prius
imbuuntur quam contemnere deos, exuere patriam, parentes liberos fratres
vilia habere. Other synonyms of circumcisus are recutitus (Pers. v 184)
and verpus (Juv. xiv 104). Horace, Sat. i 9, 70, has curti Iudaei.
§3. iuventa: this poet. form (cf. Dom. 18, 1; Aug. 61, 1; 68) is
used by Livy. Suetonius has iuventus more frequently; he always uses
senecta (not in Cic.), e.g. Galb. 4, 1: 17 (in Tib. 24, 2 senectus occurs in
an utterance of Tiberius).
civilis animi: see on Vesp. 9, 2.
confidens: = audax, impudens, temerarius; cf. Calig. 51, 1, diversissima
in eodem vitia, summam confidentiam et contra nimium metum. As an
adj., confidens is not used in a good sense in any writer between Plautus
and Apuleius; cf. Cic. Tusc. iii 14, Qui fortis est, idem est fidens, quoniam
confidens mala consuetudine loquendi in vitio ponitur, ductum verbum a
confidendo, quod laudis est.
Caenidi: a mistress of Vespasian, who treated her almost as a lawful
wife; see Vesp. 3.
Histria: a peninsula at the north-eastern corner of the Adriatic sea,
running out from the coast of Liburnia between Tergeste (Trieste) and
the Sinus Flanaticus (Gulf of Quarnero).
osculum
offerenti: as though she were the wedded wife of
Vespasian. It was customary at Rome for women to kiss their own
relations and those of their husband as far as the degree of second cousins;
cf. Polyb. in Athen. x 440, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις (τὴν γυναῖκα) φιλεῖν δεῖ τοὺς συγγενεῖς
τοὺς ἑαυτῆς καὶ τοὺς τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἕως ἐξανεψίων (sobrinorum). See Marquardt,
Privatl.2 31.
manum praebuit: sc. osculandam, as a sign of respect due from one
in an inferior station. See on Oth. 6, 2, osculo exceptus.
generum fratris: Flavius Sabinus, married to Julia daughter of Titus;
see c. 10, 4.
albatos
ministros: the imperial attendants (aulici ministri) wore a
white tunic adorned with a border or lace of gold; cf. Amm. Marc. xxxvi
6, 5, tunica auro distincta, ut regius minister: Cod. Iust. xi 9, 2, Nemo vir
auratas habeat aut in tunicis aut in lineis paragaudas (= limbos, i.e.
borders, fringes) nisi in tantummodo quibus hoc propter imperiale ministerium concessum est. Marcus Aurelius allowed the more prominent
citizens to give banquets with the same pomp as himself, and with servants
like his own: Capitol. M. Antoninus 17, 5, Tunc viris clarioribus permisit
ut eodem cultu quo et ipse vel ministris similibus convivia exhiberent.
Οὐκ ἀγαθὸν πολυκοιρανίη: words used by Odysseus in Hom. Il. ii 204.
The rest of this verse and the beginning of the next were quoted by
Caligula at the time when he was claiming absolute monarchy: Calig. 22,
1, Compluribus cognominibus adsumptis-nam et “pius” et “castrorum
filius” et ‘“pater exercituum’”et‘optimus maximus Caesar'' vocabatur—
cum audiret forte reges, qui officii causa in urbem advenerant, concertantes
apud se super cenam de nobilitate generis, exclamavit : Εῖς κοίρανος ἔστω,
εἷς βασιλεύς.
CHAPTER 13.
et patri se et fratri imperium dedisse: Martial, in an adulatory poem
(ix 101) on Domitian as the greater Hercules (maior Alcides), praises
him for surrendering a world-empire, which was his own, to his father
Vespasian and for subordinating himself to his elder brother Titus: Solus
Iuleas cum iam retineret habenas, | tradidit inque suo tertius orbe fuit.
Both Vespasian and Titus were absent in the East at the time when the
army of Vespasian under Antonius Primus entered Rome. Domitian
(aged 18) was installed in the Palace and received the title of "Caesar'
as Vespasian's son (see c. 1, 3). He was appointed praetor with consular
power and comported himself with tyrannical arrogance (omnem vim
dominationis licenter exercuit), though the real authority rested with
Mucianus until Vespasian arrived in person.
reddidisse: used not only in the sense of giving back, but also of
paying one his due (ἀποδιδόναι).
in reducenda post divortium uxore: see c. 3, 1.
revocatam: so Salmasius for vocatam of the MSS., re- having been
lost by haplography after edicere.
pulvinar: a sacred couch on which the statues of the gods rested,
as distinct from the lectus of a mere mortal. A pulvinar was among the
divine honours bestowed on Julius Caesar (Iul. 76, 1). The imperial box
built by Augustus in the Circus Maximus was also called a pulvinar
(Aug. 45, 1; Claud. 4, 3).
adclamari: this verb is used of cries of disapproval in Cicero; of
cries of approval first in Livy (xxxiv 50). Suetonius uses it in a favourable sense here and in Vitell. 15, 4: Claud. 7; 27, 2; in an unfavourable
sense in Aug. 70, 2; Tib. 52, 3; Galb. 20, 2. So adclamatio favourable
in Iul. 79, 1; Aug. 58, 1; Oth. 6, 3; unfavourable in Dom. 23, 1. See
Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 67.
in amphitheatro epuli die: see on c. 4, 5.
libenter audiit: Statius (Silv. i 6, 84) in his description of a banquet
given by Domitian to the people in the amphitheatre says that the delighted
recipients raised shouts of “dominus" and adds “Hoc solum vetuit licere
Caesar." It would seem therefore that the epulum mentioned by Suetonius
must have been given at a later date when Domitian was less rigorous in
this respect. Cf. Gsell, op. cit. 49, n. 5.
domino: the title "dominus,” which suggested both a slave-master
and a political tyrant, was rejected with loathing by Augustus; cf. Aug.
53, 1, Domini appellationem ut maledictum et obprobrium semper exhorruit.
Cum spectante eo ludos pronuntiatum esset in mimo: “O dominum aequum.
et bonum!" et universi quasi de ipso dictum exultantes comprobassent, et
statim manu vultuque indecoras adulationes repressit et insequenti die
gravissimo corripuit edicto; dominumque se posthac appellari ne a liberis
quidem aut nepotibus suis vel serio vel ioco passus est, atque eius modi
blanditias etiam inter ipsos prohibuit. So too Tiberius: Tib. 27, Dominus
appellatus a quodam denuntiavit ne se amplius contumeliae causa nominaret:
Dio lvii 8, (ὁ Τιβέριος) πολλάκις ἔλεγεν ὅτι δεσπότης (dominus) μὲν τῶν δούλων,
αὐτοκράτωρ (imperator) δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν, τῶν δὲ δὴ λοιπῶν πρόκριτος (princeps) εἰμί. Caligula, whom Dio (lix 3) describes as μοναρχικώτατος, claimed
the title of ‘dominus”; cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 3, his elatus dominum dici,
atque insigne regni capiti nectere tentaverat. Juvenal (iv 96) uses
“dominus” of Domitian, and Pliny (Pan. 55) says of Trajan in contrast
with him: sedem obtinet principis, ne sit domino locus; cf. ib. 45, scis, ut
sunt diversa natura dominatio et principatus, ita non aliis esse principem
gratiorem quam qui maxime dominum graventur. See below on "dominus
et deus."
feliciter: cf. Claud. 7, adclamante populo: ‘‘Feliciter” partim ‘“patruo
imperatoris, partim “Germanici fratri!”: Petron. Satyr. 50, familia
"Gaio feliciter!'” conclamavit: ib. 60, consurreximus
patri patriae, feliciter!'' diximus.
sed et see on Galb. 4, 1.
Capitolino certamine: see c. 4, 4.
et
"Augusto,
Palfurium Suram: a notorious delator under Domitian; cf. Juv. iv 53,
Si quid Palfurio, si credimus Armillato, | quidquid conspicuum pulchrumque est aequore toto, | res fisci est, ubicumque natat. The Schol. on Juv.
l.c. gives us particulars of his career, on the authority of Marius Maximus
the historian: Palfurius Sura, consularis filius, sub Nerone luctatus est
cum virgine Lacedaemonia in agone (i.e. a public contest): post inde a
Vespasiano senatu motus transivit ad Stoicam sectam, in qua cum praevaleret et eloquentia et artis poeticae gloria, abusus familiaritate Domitiani
acerbissime partes delationis exercuit: quo interfecto, senatu accusante
damnatus est.
de oratoribus: = de numero oratorum (certantium); cf. Ov. Am. iii 3,
46, non de tetricis dicerer esse deus, and other passages cited by KühnerStegmann, i 499. Bremi explains de oratoribus coronatum as propter
victoriam de oratoribus reportatam coronatum (cf. Iul. 11, tropaea Gai
=
Mari de Iugurtha). The contest in which Palfurius was successful is that
described in c. 4, 4, certabant prosa oratione Graece Latineque, where the
"coronae" are also mentioned.
nullo responso dignatus: for this as a sign of arrogance cf. Cicero 's
jesting remark to the jurisconsult Valerius, Fam. i 10, Qui istinc veniunt,
partim te superbum esse dicunt quod nihil respondeas, partim contumeliosum, quod male respondeas; also to another jurisconsult Trebatius, Fam. vii
16, superbiam tuam accusant, quod negent te percontantibus respondere
(resp. meaning "to answer" and "to give counsel's opinion'').
tacere iussit voce praeconis: a precedent followed by Hadrian; cf.
Dio lxix 6, ἦγε δὲ καὶ τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ῥωμαίων ἐμβριθῶς μᾶλλον ἢ θωπευτικῶς, καί
ποτε ἰσχυρῶς αὐτοῦντί τι ἐν ὁπλομαχίᾳ (ludis gladiatoriis) οὔτε ἔνειμε καὶ προσέτι
ἐκέλευσε τοῦτο δὴ τὸ τοῦ Δομιτιανοῦ κηρυχθῆναι “ σιωπήσατε.” οὐκ ἐλέχθη μὲν
γάρ, ὁ γὰρ κῆρυξ ἀνατείνας τὴν χεῖρα καὶ ἐξ αὐτοῦ τούτου ἡσυχάσας, ὥσπερ ἐιώθασι
ποιεῖν (οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν ὁπότε ὑπὸ κηρύγματος σιγάζονται), ἐπειδὴ ἐσιώπησαν, ἔφη
“ τοῦτ᾽ ἐθέλει.”
§2. formalem
epistulam: formalem is explained by Baumg.-Cr. as
“forma sollemni conscriptam, cum formulis titulisque sollemnibus"; by
Forcellini as "quae eadem forma ad plures scribebatur’' (ἐγκύκλιος, α
circular letter). The Thes. Ling. Lat. (vi 1081, 1088) connects formalis
here with forma in its special sense of an emperor's decree or rescript,
which afforded a basis and model for magisterial ordinances. In M the
reading is formaul emdictaret, and Bentley conjectured formulam dictaret
epistula.
dictaret: sc. to his secretary (ab epistulis). The head of the imperial
secretariate under Domitian was Abascantus, and the multitudinous duties
of his office are described by his friend the poet Statius (Silv. v 1, 85 sqq.,
quoted in Introd., p. 11).
dominus et deus: cf. Dio Chrysost. Οr. 45, 1, τὸν ἰσχυρότατον καὶ
βαρύτατον καὶ δεσπότην ὀνομαζόμενον καὶ θεὸν παρὰ πᾶσιν Ἕλλησι καὶ βαρβάροις :
Dio Cass. lxvii 5, ἤδη γὰρ καὶ θεὸς ἠξίου νομίζεσθαι, καὶ δεσπότης καλούμενος καὶ
θεὸς ὑπερηγάλλετο. ταῦτα οὐ μόνον ἐλέγετο ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐγράφετο: 1xvii 13,
προσκυνήσας (ὁ Κέλσος) αὐτῷ, δεσπότην τε καὶ θεὸν (ἃ παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἤδη
προσηγορεύετο) πολλάκις ὀνομάσας, κ.τ.λ.: Aur. Vict. Caes. 11, 2, maior
libidinum flagitio ac plus quam superbe utens patribus, quippe qui se
dominum deumque dici coegerit: [id.] Epit. 11, 6, more C. Caligulae
dominum sese deumque dici coegit: Eutrop. vii 23, 2, dominum se et deum
primus appellari iussit: Oros. vii 10, 2, in tantam superbiam prolapsus fuit,
ut dominum sese ac deum vocari scribi colique iusserit. The date at which
Domitian claimed these titles is between Oct. 1, 85 A.D. and Sept. 30, 86
according to Euseb.-Hieron. Chron. p. 161 Schoene. Martial first uses them
of him in Bk. v (89 A.D.) 8, 1, edictum domini deique nostri; contrast
x 72, 3, where on the accession of Trajan he writes: dicturus dominum
deumque non sum |... non est hic dominus sed imperator. Pliny (Pan. 2)
praises Trajan for making no such claim to divinity: Nusquam ut deo,
nusquam ut numini blandiamur: non enim de tyranno, sed de cive, non de
domino, sed de parente loquimur: ib. 52, Tu delubra non nisi adoraturus
intras, tibi maximus honor excubare pro templis, postibusque praetexi.
Sic fit ut tibi di summum inter homines fastigium servent, cum deorum
ipse non appetas. See also note on “domino” above; Mommsen, Staatsr.
ii³ 759.
statuas sibi in Capitolio: cf. Suidas (s.v. Δομετιανός), οὐχ ὑπέμεινεν
ἑτέρων αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι κατὰ τὸ Καπιτώλιον ἀνδριάντων στάσιν ἢ ἐκ χρυσοῦ τε καὶ
ἀργύρου πεποιημένων: Dio lxvii 8, τοσαῦτα δὲ αὐτῷ ἐψηφίσθη, ὥστε πᾶσαν ὀλίγου
δεῖν τὴν οἰκουμένην, τὴν ὑπ᾿ αὐτὸν οὖσαν, εἰκόνων αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀνδριάντων καὶ ἀργυρῶν
καὶ χρυσῶν ἐμπλησθῆναι: Eutrop. vii 23, 2, Nullam sibi nisi auream et
argenteam statuam in Capitolio passus est poni: Plin. Pan. 52, Itaque
tuam (i.e. Trajan's) statuam in vestibulo Iovis Opt. Max. unam alteramve
et hanc aeneam cernimus. At paulo ante aditus omnes, omnes gradus,
totaque area hinc auro, hinc argento relucebat, seu potius polluebatur, cum
incesti principis (i.e. Domitian) statuis permixta deorum simulacra sorderent.
(Pliny goes on to say that the road leading to the Capitol used to be
blocked by the herds of victims intended to honour the hideous effigies of
the tyrant with as much blood as he himself had shed.) Martial, i 70, 5,
refers to the gleaming statues of Domitian on the Palatine: Inde sacro
veneranda petes Palatia clivo, | plurima qua summi fulget imago ducis.
The colossal equestrian statue of Domitian in the Forum, described by
Statius (S. i 1), was of bronze. These statues were all destroyed in the
exultant outburst at his death described in c. 23. On the subject of
imperial statues see Friedlaender, Sitteng. iii¹º 58 sqq.
ponderis certi: Lipsius was the first to suggest that this means
centenum pondus (100 lbs.), the weight mentioned in Stat. S. v 1, 190,
where the dying Priscilla charges her husband Abascantus to set up a
golden image of Domitian on the Capitol: Da Capitolinis aeternum sedibus
aurum, | quo niteat sacri centeno pondere vultus | Caesaris. Vollmer,
however, in his note there, infers that centenum pondus must have exceeded
the weight fixed by Domitian, otherwise Statius would not have mentioned
the weight at all.
Ianos: vaulted passages or open archways were called Iani (or iani);
cf. Cic. N.D. ii 24, 67, principem in sacrificando Ianum esse voluerunt,
quod ab eundo nomen est ductum, ex quo transitiones perviae “iani,”
foresque in liminibus profanarum aedium “ianuae” nominantur. There
were many Iani at Rome; cf. Ov. F. i 257, where the poet addresses the
god Ianus: Cum tot sint Iani, cur stas sacratus in uno? Suetonius
mentions one built by Augustus: Aug. 31, 5, Pompei statuam
marmoreo Iano superposuit. The most famous was the medius Ianus, the
Roman Exchange, in the Forum; on the vexed question whether this was
an arcade or four archways joined in a square (Ianus quadrifrons), and
on the relation between it and the imus and summus Ianus see Jordan,
Topogr. Rom i 2, 214 sqq., and the commentators on Hor. S. ii 3, 18:
Ερ. i 1, 54.
arcus: cf. Plin. Pan. 54, Quasi prolatis imperii finibus nunc ingentes
arcus excessurosque templorum fastigium titulos, nunc menses etiam nec
hos singulos nomini Caesarum dicabamus. Arches to celebrate victories in
war, and later as a mark of honour, were characteristically Roman structures.
The first recorded instance is that of the three fornices (fornix being the
older Latin term) erected in 196 B.c. by L. Stertinius for victories in
Spain (Liv. xxxiii 27). In 190 B.c. Scipio Africanus built another on
the Clivus Capitolinus, surmounted by seven gilded statues and two figures
of horses (Liv. xxxvii 3). Arches were erected in honour of the Caesars
and the members of the imperial house, not only for military successes
but also for great public works; e.g. the arch in honour of Domitian at
Sinuessa, where the Via Domitia began, mentioned in Stat. S. iv 3, 97,
arcus, belligeris ducis tropaeis | et totis Ligurum nitens metallis, | quantus
nubila qui coronat imbri (i.e. a rainbow). There are still in Rome itself
five arcus triumphales of Drusus, Titus, Septimius Severus, Gallienus, and
Constantine. For illustrations of these, as restored, see Baumeister, Denk.
d. class. Alt. iii 1865 sqq.; Daremberg-Saglio, i 391 sqq.
cum quadrigis: the entablature, resting on columns against the piers
of the arch, was surmounted by an "attica," on the front of which was
the titulus or dedicatory inscription, and on the top of it the statue of the
triumphator, at first on horseback and later standing in a chariot. The
statues of victors standing in their four-horsed chariots above an arcus
triumphalis are mentioned in Prudent. c. Symm. ii 556, Frustra igitur
currus summo miramur in arcu | quadriiugos stantesques duces in curribus
altis | Fabricios, Curios, hinc Drusos, inde Camillos. Juvenal mentions
similar statues set up in the front courts of illustrious Roman houses:
vii 125, huius enim stat currus aeneus, alti | quadriiuges in vestibulis:
viii 3, stantes in curribus Aemilianos. The Arch of Trajan at the entrance
of the Forum Traianum was crowned by a statue of the emperor in a
triumphal chariot drawn by six horses, as is seen from his coins.
regiones urbis: see on c. 1, 1.
cuidam: dat. of agent (App. i. § 3. C. c).
arci: i.e. the Gr. ἀρκεῖ = satis est, a play on the Lat. arci which is
used as the pl. of arcus by Varro (Non. p. 108 Lindsay). With a play on
the word "arch" one might render "Arch-builder, enough!" Bentley
hazarded a conjecture APK (= MCXX), but thinks it more probable
that some Latin word is to be read: Latinum verbum quaerendum, non
Graecum ἀρκεῖ. Nam cum auctor “Graece” dicit, non ponit nisi Latina.
But the practice of Suetonius varies: at times he gives merely a Latin
version of what he says was written or spoken in Greek (e.g. in Ner. 45),
at times he gives the original Greek (e.g. in Claud. 43).
consulatus septemdecim: six in the reign of his father Vespasian,
in the years 71, 73, 75, 76, 77, 79; one with his brother the emperor Titus,
in 80; ten when he himself was emperor, in 82-88 (inclusive), 90, 92, 95.
See also c. 2, 1. After his victory over the Chatti (c. 6, 1) the senate
decreed to Domitian the consulship for ten years, but this sequence was
interrupted in 89. Statius hymns Domitian's 17th consulship in Silv. iv
1, 1, Laeta bis octonis accedit purpura fastis | Caesaris insignemque aperit
Germanicus annum, etc.
septem medios continuavit: in 82-88 A.D. Ausonius, Grat. Act. 6,
speaks loosely of Domitian's 17 consulships as continuous: Scis, imperator
doctissime (i.e. Gratianus), septem ac decem Domitiani consulatus, quos
ille invidia alios provehendi continuando conseruit, ita in eius aviditate
derisos, ut haec eum pagina fastorum suorum, immo fastidiorum, fecerit
insolentem nec potuerit praestare felicem. Pliny (Pan. 58) denounces
these "continuous" consulships: Non te (i.e. Trajan) ad exemplar eius
voco, qui continuis consulatibus fecerat longum quemdam et sine discrimine annum: his te confero, quos certum est, quoties consules fuerunt,
non sibi praestitisse
Contigit ergo privatis aperire annum fastosque
reserare, et hoc quoque redditae libertatis indicium fuit, quod consul alius
quam Caesar esset. Miseros ambitionis, qui ita consules semper ut semper
principes erant!
Quamquam non tam ambitio quam livor et malignitas
videri potest omnes annos possidere summumque illud purpurae decus non
nisi praecerptum praefloratumque transmittere. The flatterer Statius
pretends that the reluctant Domitian was only yielding to an insistent
senate and people: Silv. iv 1, 10, Curia Caesareum gaudet vicisse pudorem;
1, 18, talem (i.e. consul) te cernere semper | mense meo (i.e. January) tua
Roma cupit; 1, 33, flectere (fut.) tamen precibusque senatus | promittes
hunc saepe diem.
titulo tenus: see on c. 1, 3.
quemquam: cf. Iul. 59, 1, ne religione quidem ulla a quoquam incepto
absterritus. Cicero and the writers of his and the Augustan age do not
use quisquam adjectivally except with names of persons or classes; see
Neue-Wagener, Formenlehre ii³ 505, Tyrrell and Purser on Cic. Att. v 10, 4.
It is found with other nouns in Plaut., Lucr., and post-Aug. writers; e.g.
Tac. Dial. 29, 3, cuiquam ministerio: Quintil. x 2, 6, cuiusquam rei.
plerosque ad Idus usque Ianuarias: a practice condemned by Pliny,
Pan. 65, Quam diversum consuetudine illorum qui pauculis diebus gestum
consulatum, immo non gestum, abiciebant per edictum! An example of
Domitian's resigning the consulship on the Ides (13th) of Jan. is in
92 A.D. when he (for the 16th time) and Q. Volusius Saturninus were
elected on Jan. 1, and on Jan. 13 L. Venuleius Apronianus took Domitian 's
place (C.I.L. xiv 243, Dessau 6126). Caligula held four consulships, one
from the Kalends of July for two months, a second from the Kalends
of Jan. for 30 days, a third up to the Ides of Jan., and the fourth until
Jan. 7 (Calig. 17). Tiberius, when emperor, was thrice consul, once for a
few days, once for 3 months, once until the Ides (15th) of May (Tib. 26).
Augustus held 13 consulships, 5 for the full year, the rest for 9, 6, 4, or
3 months, except the second (33 B.C.) which he held only for a few hours,
resigning it on the Kalends of Jan. (Aug. 26). For the brief tenure of
consulships by private individuals under the Empire see on c. 2, 1.
post autem: for autem placed immediately after the prep. cf. Iul. 46,
post autem pontificatum. This order of words, which is very rare, is found
in Cic. Orat. 154, dicitur cum illis, cum autem nobis non dicitur, sed
nobiscum: N.D. ii 52, Tim. 26, Off. ii 8: Auct. Bell. Afr. 59: Nep.
Eum. 13. Suetonius has autem in the fourth place in Vesp. 22, 1, et
super cenam autem; this is frequent in Plautus, and there are several
instances in Cicero, e.g. Quinct. 44, quid a nobis autem refertur?
duos triumphos: over the Chatti in 83 and over the Dacians in 86;
see on c. 6, 1, duplicem triumphum egit.
Germanici cognomine assumpto: Vollmer (op. cit. p. 45, n. 6) points
out that these words are not to be taken with post duos triumphos (as
Domitian assumed the cognomen of “Germanicus" after the one triumph
of 83), but are introduced to explain why he chose the name "Germanicus''
for September. Gsell (p. 45, n. 4) thinks that the two triumphs mentioned
here are the double triumph of 89 (see on c. 6, 1), and makes Suetonius
guilty of the blunder of asserting that it was not till after this double
triumph that Domitian assumed the cognomen of “Germanicus" and gave
that name to September. The date when he took the cognomen is fixed by
two diplomata militaria (C.I.L. iii pp. 1962, 1963: Dessau, 1996, 1997),
the first dated June 9, 83, in which he is still "Domitianus Augustus,"
and the second dated Sept. 3, 84, in which he appears as "Domitianus
Augustus Germanicus." Also on the coins of 84 he is styled Germanicus,
but not on those of 83. His new title is referred to in Frontin. Strateg. ii
11, 7, Imperator Caesar Augustus Germanicus eo bello quo victis hostibus
cognomen Germanici meruit, etc.: Mart. ii 2, 3, Nobilius (nomen) domito
tribuit Germania Rheno, | et puer hoc dignus nomine, Caesar, eras (cf.
Dom. 2, 1). | Frater Idumaeos meruit cum patre triumphos, | quae datur
ex Chattis laurea, tota tua est: xiv 170, cui nomina Rhenus | vera dedit.
Septembrem et Octobrem
transnominavit: the date of the
renaming of these months is uncertain. Dio (lxvii 4) notices only the
change of October to "Domitianus'' after Domitian's first triumph over
the Chatti. According to Euseb.-Hieron. the changes were made between
Oct. 1, 86 and Sept. 30, 87; but the old names occur in the Acta Arvalia
for 87 (C.I.L. vi 2065). Janssen mentions that “Domitianus” is found
in a Latin papyrus of 88 (Nicole-Morel, P. Gen. Lat. i 8); the first appearance of either of the new names in a Greek papyrus is in 90 (P. Oxyr. ii
p. 164, μηνὸς Δομιτιανοῦ δ'). An inscription of 89 in the Florence Museum
has "Germanicus" for September: exces(sit) viii k[al(endas)] Germ[anic(as)] Saeniano et Blaeso co(n)s(ulibus). Martial and Statius do not
help to fix the date, as the poems in which they refer to the new names
were not published till 94 and 95: Mart. ix 1, 1, Dum Ianus hiemes,
Domitianus autumnos | Augustus annis commodabit aestates, | dum grande
famuli nomen asseret Rheni | Germanicarum magna lux Kalendarum, etc.:
Stat. S. iv 1, 42, nondum omnis honorem | annus habet, cupiuntque decem
tua nomina menses. The months recovered their old names at Domitian's
death; cf. Plut. Num. 19: Macrob. S. i 12, 36, Mensis September principalem sui retinet appellationem, quem Germanici appellatione, Octobrem
vero suo nomine Domitianus invaserat. Sed ubi infaustum vocabulum (i.e.
Domitian's name) ex omni aere vel saxo placuit eradi, menses quoque
usurpatione tyrannicae appellationis exuti sunt: cautio postea principum
ceterorum diri ominis infausta vitantium mensibus a Septembri usque ad
Decembrem prisca nomina reservavit. Tiberius refused to allow the name
"Tiberius" to be given to September and "Livius" to October (Tib. 26).
Nero called April "Neroneus" (Ner. 55). Julius Caesar was honoured
by having Quintilis (July) changed to "Iulius” (Iul. 76), and Augustus
changed Sextilis (August) to "Augustus" (Aug. 31). Commodus (c.
192 A.D.) called all the months by his own names and titles, Amazonius,
Invictus, Felix, Pius, Lucius, Aelius, Aurelius, Commodus, Augustus,
Herculeus, Romanus, Exsuperatorius (Dio lxxii 15). The compound transnominare is first found in Suetonius.
altero suscepisset imperium: he received the imperium on Sept. 14,
81 A.D.; see on c. 17, 3.
altero natus esset: on Oct. 24, 51 A.D.
CHAPTER 14.
terribilis cunctis et invisus: Eutrop. vii 23, cum ob scelera universis
exosus esse coepisset, interfectus est suorum coniuratione in Palatio: Aur.
Vict. Caes. 11, magis magisque saevitia nimius eoque suspectior etiam suis
libertorum consilio uxore non ignara ... poenas luit.
amicorum libertorumque: Dio (lxvii 15) says that those who planned
and carried out the plot against Domitian were Parthenius (see c. 16, 2)
and Sigerius, who were both Domitian's cubicularii or a cubiculo, Entellus
who was a libellis, and Stephanus a freedman (steward of Domitilla,
Domitian's niece, see c. 17, 1); he also mentions that Norbanus and
Petronius Secundus, praefecti praetorio, were said to have been privy to
the plot.
conspiratione: the reading of YON, adopted by Roth and
Preud 'homme. G has insidiis before amicorum, and this is preferred by
Ihm. The other MSS. omit the substantive on which the genitives depend.
uxoris: Domitia, who lived in continual fear of his vengeance for
her infidelity (c. 3, 1); cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, Igitur metu crudelitatis
et conscientiae suae coniuravere plerique
adscita etiam in consilium
tyranni uxore Domitia, ob amorem Paridis histrionis a Principe cruciatus
formidante. Dio (l.c.) mentions the report (ὡς λέγεται) that she was aware
of the conspiracy: αὐτὸ οὔτε ἡ Δομιτία, ἡ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ, ἠγνόησε . . : ἥ τε γὰρ
Δομιτία ἀεί ποτε ὑπ' αὐτοῦ ἐμισεῖτο, καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐφοβεῖτο μὴ καὶ ἀποθάνῃ.
goes on to say that Domitian kept under his pillow a list of doomed
suspects; while he slept, this was stolen by a page, in whose hands Domitia
found it and communicated the contents to the conspirators.
nec non et: see on Tit. 5, 2.
Chaldaei: see on Vitell. 14, 4.
super cenam: see on Tit. 8, 1.
Dio
fungis: the emperor Claudius was poisoned with a boletus (mushroom)
medicatus (Claud. 44, 2); cf. Tac. A. xii 67, infusum delectabili cibo boleto
venenum: Juv. v 147, boletus (ponetur) domino, sed quales Claudius edit |
ante illum uxoris, post quem nihil amplius edit: Mart. i 20, 4, boletum,
qualem Claudius edit, edas. Nero, who was a party to the poisoning of
Claudius, used afterwards to praise mushrooms as "the food of the
gods" (Ner. 33, 1).
§2. edicti de excidendis vineis: see c. 7, 2.
gratiam faceret: = remitteret; cf. Gell. i 12, gratia Papiae legis per
senatum fit. Sonnenschein, on Plaut. Rud. 1414, shows that the phrase
gratiam facere alicui alicuius rei or de aliqua re means "to renounce
something in favour of someone" and may be used (1) literally "to give
up," or (2) "to let off," e.g. Plaut. Cas. 372, de istac Casina huic nostro
vilico gratiam facias, ‘‘give up"; Rud. 1414, iuris iurandi volo gratiam
facias, "let off"; so in Suet. Tib. 35, 1, equiti Romano iuris iurandi
gratiam fecit: Aug. 17, 2, Bononiensibus gratiam fecit coniurandi cum
tota Italia pro partibus suis (= concessit ut ne coniurarent, coniurare'
remisit, ‘“excused them from joining the general confederation to support
his cause'"): Aug. 38, 3, reddendi equi gratiam fecit eis, qui maiores
annorum quinque et triginta retinere eum nollent (where see Shuckburgh).
sparsi libelli: for this method of defaming an emperor cf. Aug. 55,
Etiam sparsos de se in curia famosos libellos nec expavit et (al. nec)
magna cura redarguit ac ne requisitis quidem auctoribus id modo censuit,
cognoscendum posthac de iis, qui libellos aut carmina ad infamiam cuiuspiam sub alieno nomine edant: Tib. 66, nullo non damnatorum omne probri
genus coram vel per libellos in orchestra (where the senators sat in the
theatre) positos ingerente.
his versibus: these verses are a famous epigram by Evenus of Ascalon,
Anth. Pal. ix 75. The second line is the same as the last line of an
epigram by Leonidas of Tarentum which gives the full fable, Anth. Pal. ix
99, Ἴξαλος εὐπώγων αἰγὸς πόσις ἔν ποθ᾽ ἁλωῇ | οἴνης τοὺς ἁπαλοὺς πάντας ἔδαψε
κλάδους. | τῷ δ᾽ ἔπος ἐκ γαίης τόσον ἄπυε· κεῖρε, κάκιστε, | γναθμοῖς ἡμέτερον κλῆμα
τὸ καρποφόρον· | ῥίζα γὰρ ἔμπεδος οὖσα, πάλιν γλυκὺ νέκταρ ἀνήσει, | ὅσσον
ἐπισπεῖσαι σοί, τράγε, θυομένῳ. This is imitated by Ovid, F. i 355 sqq.,
(caper) quem spectans aliquis dentes in vite prementem | talia non tacito
verba dolore dedit: "Rode, caper, vitem: tamen hinc, cum stabis ad
aram, | in tua quod spargi cornua possit erit." | Verba fides sequitur;
noxae tibi deditus hostis | spargitur affuso cornua, Bacche, mero.
custom of sacrificing to Bacchus the vine-gnawing goat is referred to in
Varr. R.R. i 2; Verg. G. ii 380, non aliam ob culpam Baccho caper
omnibus aris | caeditur.
The
κἄν: a correction by Roth (also in C.I.L. iv 3407, 6) of KAI. Politian
read κήν, which is the form in Anth. Pal. ix 75.
σοί, τράγε : so Roth (and earlier Bentley) from Anth. Pal. for
CΟΙΚΑΡΘΕ (MGLP). Politian, followed by the old editors, read
Καίσαρι. Bücheler conjectured σοί, κάπρε, (“nescio an rectius,” Ihm).
Alexander, op. cit. 28 sqq., defending σοί, κάπρε, (which he proposes independently) says: "Suetonius may have misquoted, particularly in a
place where the Greek τράγε would suggest the Latin caper with a natural
reflex again to the Greek κάπρος, or an alteration in the original may have
been made designedly by those who scattered abroad the defamatory libelli,
to emphasize some point the meaning of which is now obscure."
though the boar (κάπρος) is mentioned as devastating vines (Alexander
cites Psalm 80 and Ov. M. viii 294), the words φάγῃς ἐπὶ ῥίζαν, “eat away
to the root," seem much more appropriate when used of the goat.
But
§ 3. excogitatum: Suetonius is peculiar in using excogitatus (= cogitando inventus, ἐπινενοημένος) in the sense of exquisitus, to denote something carefully devised and distinctive; cf. Calig. 22, 3, templum numini
suo proprium et sacerdotes et excogitatissimas hostias instituit (these
victims including flamingoes, peacocks, guinea-fowl, etc.).
quotiens: see on Galb. 10, 2.
trabeati: the trabea was a variety of toga ornamented with trabes,
bands or stripes, the arrangement of the stripes being uncertain. Three
kinds of trabea were distinguished by Suetonius according to Servius (on
Aen. vii 612): Suetonius in libro de Genere vestium (see Introd. c. iv)
dicit tria esse genera trabearum: unum diis sacratum, quod est tantum de
purpura; aliud regum, quod est purpureum, habet tamen album aliquid;
tertium, augurale, de purpura et cocco. Dion. Hal. (ii 70, vi 13) says that
the trabea of the Salii was bordered with purple and had scarlet παρυφαί
(trabes), while that of the knights was entirely of purple with the same
scarlet παρυφαί. The trabea was worn by the kings at Rome; then by
consuls at the opening of the temple of Janus; by the Salii in their dance
in armour; by knights (trabeata agmina, Stat. S. iv 2, 32), especially on
the occasion of a transvectio or decursio equitum (cf. Tac. A. iii 2);
and by augurs, the Flamen Dialis, and the Flamen Martialis. See
Daremberg-Saglio, v 382; Marquardt, Privatl. 507.
lictores: after his victory over the Chatti in 83 (c. 6, 1) Domitian was
2 P
granted 24 lictors (Dio lxvii 4), and this number may have been continued
under subsequent emperors. Augustus seems to have had 24 lictors down
to 29 B.C.; from then until 23 B.c. he had the 12 consular lictors at Rome,
and until 19 B.C. he had 12 lictors outside Rome as proconsul; in 19 в.с.
he received for ever the right of having 12 lictors on all occasions (Dio liv
10, ταῖς δώδεκα ῥάβδοις ἀεὶ καὶ πανταχοῦ χρῆσθαι). Cf. Mommsen, Staatsr. i³
387, ii³ 807; Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2004.
apparitores: this word is more frequently used as a general term
for the public officers attached to, and in immediate attendance upon, the
magistrates at Rome (qui apparent magistratibus), and included the five
classes: scribae, accensi, lictores, viatores, praecones; sometimes it is used
in a more limited sense excluding the lictores (as here and in Val. Max. vii
3, 9), or the scribae (as in Cic. Verr. iii 66, Plut. Cat. min. 16). Mommsen,
op. cit. i 332 sqq.
§ 4. tempore suspecti periculi: i.e. the time foretold by the Chaldaei.
phengite lapide: cf. Plin. N.H. xxxvi 163, Nerone principe in Cappadocia repertus est lapis duritia marmoris, candidus atque translucens etiam
qua parte fulvae inciderant venae, ex argumento phengites (i.e. φεγγίτης
from φέγγος, light, brightness) appellatus. Hoc construxerat (Nero) aedem
Fortunae amplexus aurea domo (i.e. enclosing this temple in the
precincts of his Golden House, see Oth. 7, 1), quare etiam foribus opertis
interdiu claritas ibi diurna erat alio quam specularium modo, tamquam
inclusa luce, non transmissa. In N.H. xxxvi 196 Pliny mentions wallmirrors made from another stone, Obsian or Obsidian, which he describes
as “nigerrimi coloris, aliquando et translucidi, crassiore visu atque in
speculis parietum pro imagine umbras reddente.” Guillaume (in
Daremberg-Saglio, i 176) says that phengites was probably a gypseous
alabaster of a peculiar transparence; Lenz (Mineralogie der alten Griech.
und Römer p. 153) describes it as a colourless calcareous spar. Agricola
(16th cent.), De Natura Fossilium vii 307, considers it a marble; cf.
Chandler, Travels in Greece (1776) с. 63: "The gallery (of the monastery
of St. Luke at Stiris) is illuminated with pieces of the transparent marble
called Phengites, fixed in the wall in square compartments, and shedding
a yellow light." Phengite is a modern name for the species of mica known
as Muscovy-glass. The Greek σεληνίτης or moonstone was used as a material
for windows and so was called φεγγίτης.
•
custodias audiebat: cf. Dio lxvii 12, συνεγίγνετο δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς τοῖς
κατηγορήσουσι καὶ τοῖς καταμαρτυρήσουσι, καὶ συνέπλαττε καὶ συνετίθει πάνθ' ὅσα
λεχθῆναι ἔδει· καὶ πολλάκις καὶ τοῖς δεσμώταις κατὰ μόνας ἐλάλει, τὰ δεσμὰ αὐτῶν
ἐν ταῖς χερσὶ κατέχων, οὔτε γὰρ ἄλλοις τὰ λεχθησόμενα ἐπίστευε, καὶ ἐκείνους καὶ
δεδεμένους ἐδεδίει. Suetonius uses custodiae in the sense of ii qui custodiuntur in Tib. 61, 5, Calig. 27, 1, and similarly the collective singular in
Ner. 31, 3, quod ubique esset custodiae in Italiam deportari praeceperat.
Servius (on Aen. xi 184), noting custodia in the sense of qui custodit,
condemns the passive use : ut hi qui custodiuntur ‘‘custodiae” dicantur,
usurpatum est; unde male est in usu “custodiae audiuntur.” This passive
use occurs in Seneca, Ep. 5, 7, eadem catena et custodiam et militem
copulat: Dial. ix 11, 12, Ptolemaeum inter Gaianas custodias vidimus;
also in Plin. Ep. x 19: Modest. Dig. xlviii 1, 12, praetor custodias auditurus.
For other abstract substantives used in a concrete sense by Suetonius see
App. i. § 2. α.
ne bono quidem exemplo: ablative of manner. Cf. Sen. Ep. 77, 7,
describing how the slaves of the suffering Marcellinus were unwilling to
help him to commit suicide, and a Stoic friend of his pointed out to the
slaves that it was as bad to prevent one's master from killing himself
as it was to kill him (tam mali exempli esse occidere dominum quam
prohibere). See also on Vitell. 10, 1, ut pessimi exempli.
audendam: this reading is found only in some of the later MSS.,
and as a correction in L; audiendam, the reading of the rest, is due to
audiebat at the end of the preceding sentence.
Epaphroditum: first mentioned in Tac. A. xv 55 in connexion with
the discovery of Piso's conspiracy against Nero in 65 A.D. He remained.
faithful to Nero to the end, and was one of the three freedmen who
accompanied him on his last flight from Rome, and when Nero (hearing
that he had been declared a public enemy and sentenced to be scourged
to death) wished to kill himself but lacked strength and courage,
Epaphroditus aided him: cf. Ner. 49, 3, ferrum iugulo adegit iuvante
Epaphrodito a libellis. The Stoic philosopher Epictetus was a slave of
his, and he is probably the Epaphroditus at whose suggestion Josephus
wrote his Jewish Antiquities, and to whom he dedicates his work against
Apion (Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii 36).
a libellis: the same office as he had held under Nero, succeeding
Doryphorus who died in 62. The expression a libellis denoted both the
department of petitions and the head of the department. The emperor
Claudius organised the a libellis (ἐπὶ ταῖς βίβλοις) as a distinct office along
with the ab epistulis and a cognitionibus. Under Claudius, as under Nero
and the Flavian emperors, the a libellis were freedmen; Hadrian and his
successors appointed equites. The libelli with which the department dealt
were petitions to the emperor from individuals or communities for benefactions or protection, hearing of cases, relief from imposts, etc. In the
phrases a libellis, ab epistulis, etc., there is an ellipse of servus (or libertus);
cf. Iul. 74, 1, a manu servus (= amanuensis in Tit. 3, 2), the force of a or
ab being "on the side of" "in respect of'" "in the department of"; see
Kühner-Stegmann i 495, where ab epistulis is explained as ein Sklave von
seiten des Briefschreibens.
capitali poena condemnavit: Dio (lxvii 14) says that Domitian first
banished and later (in 95) executed him as a deterrent to his own freedmen. For the rare abl. with condemnare cf. Vitruv. vii praef. 3, non
modo sunt reprehendendi, sed etiam poena condemnandi: Cic. Verr. iii 34,
condemnari quadruplo. Suetonius also uses ad, e.g. Claud. 14, ad bestias
condemnavit, and in, e.g. Tib. 51, 2, uno in antliam ("the treadmill'')
condemnato; in Dom. 11, 1, he has the usual gen. capitis condemnaturus.
post destitutionem: cf. Ner. 40, 1, talem principem paulo minus quattuordecim annos perpessus terrarum orbis tandem destituit.
in adipiscenda morte: cf. Fronto p. 233 N., Quanto quisque eam (sc.
mortem) natu minor adeptus est, tanto beatior . . existimandus est: Carm.
epigr. 466, 2, Quam praemature sim mortis adeptus. Death in Nero's
case was really a boon. adipisci is very rarely used of evils: Cic. Fin. i
32, neque.. quisquam est, qui dolorem amet, consectetur, adipisci velit:
Liv. vi 8, 8: Tac. A. i 74: Apul. Plat. ii 11. Cf. febrim nancisci in
Tit. 10, 1.
2P2
CHAPTER 15.
Flavium Clementem: a cousin of Domitian, being son of Vespasian 's
elder brother Flavius Sabinus (Vesp. 1, 3; Dom. 1, 2); he was a brother
of the Flavius Sabinus mentioned in c. 10, 4 as put to death by Domitian.
Hardy (Studies in Rom. Hist. p. 67) points out that Clemens was a possible
danger to Domitian from a political point of view, being the second
personage in the empire as Domitian had no heir of his own.
contemptissimae inertiae: this laziness and apathy, which might have
rendered Domitian inapprehensive of any revolutionary design on his part,
would be urged as a proof that Clemens was a Christian (see below), inactivity and indifference to all public affairs and duties being one of the
charges regularly brought by heathen opponents against the Christians;
cf. Minuc. Oct. 8, 4, latebrosa et lucifuga natio, in publico muta, in angulis
garrula: Tertull. Apol. 42, sed alio quoque iniuriarum titulo postulamur,
et infructuosi in negotiis dicimur (a charge which Tertullian indignantly
refutes; see Mayor ad loc.). Such aloofness from public life and the
interests of their fellow-men formed the charge of "odium humani generis”
for which the Christians were condemned in Nero's reign (Tac. A. xv 44).
The evidence for the alleged general persecution of Christianity by Domitian
is critically examined by Henderson, Five Roman Emperors 45 sqq.
filios: Clemens was married to Flavia Domitilla, a niece of Domitian
(see c. 17, 1), who bore him at least seven children (cf. C.I.L. vi 8942);
one, a daughter whose name is unknown, is mentioned in C.I.L. vi 948.
The two sons referred to by Suetonius were entrusted (about 90 A.D.) to
Quintilian to educate (Quint. iv prooem. 2, quoted on c. 8, 3), and Clemens
secured for Quintilian the ornamenta consularia (Auson. Grat. Act. 31).
These sons' earlier names are unknown; when designated by adoption as
the successors of Domitian their names would be (T. Flavius) Domitianus
and (T. Flavius) Vespasianus; some find a reference to this adoption in
Stat. S. iv 3, 18, qui (i.e. Domitian) genti patriae futura semper | sancit
lumina (but see Vollmer's note).
successores palam destinaverat: by adoption. Such an adoption did
not necessarily follow the legal forms; a public pronouncement by the
emperor in the Forum, the senate, or the camp was sufficient. See on
Galba's adoption of Piso, Galb. 17. There were three other methods used
by the emperors in nominating a successor, though theoretically the constitution did not recognize either heredity or designation: (1) giving a
co-regency (consortium imperii), see on Tit. 9, 3; (2) designating the
intended successor as the emperor's heir; (3) from the time of Hadrian,
bestowing on him the name of "Caesar," see on Dom. 1, 3.
et abolito: sor and Preud'homme; MGX have abolito; Ihm adopts
abolitoque the reading of N.
appellari iusserat: sorN; the other MSS. omit iusserat, and it is
omitted in Ihm's text, appellari being thus left dependent on destinaverat ;
but the passive infin. with destinare is not found in Suetonius and is very
rare elsewhere (Thes. Ling. Lat.). Preud 'homme suggested appellare
(omitting iusserat), and Bentley would read abolito
...
appellans.
Vespasianum: it is a disputed point whether the bronze coins from
Smyrna with a figure of a boy or youth and round it the name Οὐεσπασιανὸς
νεώτερος (Eckhel vi 402, Cohen i² 539) are to be referred to this adopted
son, or to Domitian's own son (mentioned in c. 3, 1) who died young and
whose name is unknown. See Stein in Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2623; Gsell,
op. cit. p. 53, n. 3.
ex tenuissima suspicione: Dio (lxvii 14) says that Clemens and his
wife Domitilla were charged with ἀθεότης, i.e. neglect of the gods of the
State, and adoption of the practices of the Jewish faith (which Dio does
not differentiate from Christianity) : κὰν τῷ αὐτῷ ἔτει (95 A.D.) ἄλλους τε
πολλοὺς καὶ τὸν Φλάβιον Κλήμεντα ὑπατεύοντα (consulem), καίπερ ἀνεψιὸν ὄντα
καὶ γυναῖκα καὶ αὐτὴν συγγενῆ ἑαυτοῦ Φλαβίαν Δομιτίλλαν ἔχοντα, κατέσφαξεν ὁ
Δομιτιανός. ἐπηνέχθη δὲ ἀμφοῖν ἔγκλημα ἀθεότητος, ὑφ' ἧς καὶ ἄλλοι ἐς τὰ
τῶν ᾿Ἰουδαίων ἤθη ἐξοκέλλοντες (aberrantes) πολλοὶ κατεδικάσθησαν, καὶ οἱ μὲν
ἀπέθανον, οἱ δὲ τῶν γοῦν οὐσιῶν ἐστερήθησαν, ἡ δὲ Δομιτίλλα ὑπερωρίσθη μόνον ἐς
Πανδατερίαν. Schiller (Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit i 2, 537, n. 6) and Weynand
(in Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2578) less probably explain ἀθεότης as a synonym of
ἀσέβεια (impietas, c. 10, 1, n.) in the sense of lèse-majesté. With regard to
Domitilla's banishment Dio seems to confuse Pandateria with Pontia,
another island in the Tuscan sea, also a place of exile, as Hieron. (Epist.
108, 7) says that Pontia is famous as the place of exile of the Christian
Domitilla; so too Euseb. (Hist. Eccl. iii 18). See note on Domitillae,
c. 17, 1.
tantum non in ipso eius consulatu: Clemens was consul ordinarius
along with Domitian in the latter's 17th consulship in 95 A.D., and probably
held the office till April 30, four months being the usual tenure in
Domitian's reign (Gsell. op. cit. 303). He was put to death in a later
part of that year when, strictly speaking, he was not consul but ex-consul.
Dio (l.c.) and Philostratus (cited below) are inaccurate in saying that he
was consul (ὑπατεύων, ὕπατος) when executed, his real position being ὑπατικός
(consularis); see Stein in Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2539. Imhof (Domitianus,
p. 116) holds that Clemens as consul ordinarius retained the title of consul
for the whole year, even though he was succeeded by consules suffecti, and
that he was not put to death till Jan. 96. Gsell makes quite a different
use of the same argument in order to reconcile the statements of Dio and
Suetonius. He thinks that Dio is speaking of Clemens as consul for the
whole of 95, the year of his execution, while Suetonius limits his consulship to the earlier months of that year, when he was actually in office.
interemit: cf. Eutrop. vii 23, 3, (Domitianus) consobrinos suos (i.е.
Flavius Clemens and Flavius Sabinus) interfecit: Plin. Pan. 48, illa
immanissima belua (i.e. Domitian),
сит propinquorum sanguinem
lamberet.
...
..
quo facto maturavit sibi exitium: Philostratus (vit. Apollon. viii
25) says that the intention of the gods to depose Domitian from the
presidency of mankind was manifest when he went so far as to slay
Clemens: ἐώθουν οἱ θεοὶ Δομετιανὸν ἤδη τῆς τῶν ἀνθρώπων προεδρίας. ἔτυχε μὲν
γὰρ Κλήμεντα ἀπεκτονὼς ἄνδρα ὕπατον, κ.τ.λ.
§ 2. continuis octo mensibus: i.e. the eight months preceding his
death on Sep. 18, 96 A.D. Imhof says that they were the eight months
intervening between the execution of Clemens (which, according to his
theory, took place in Jan. 96) and the death of Domitian, and Schiller
takes the same view.
fulgura:
=
fulmina, lightning-flashes that descend and strike, thunderbolts, a use of fulgura found in poetry and post-Aug. prose, e.g. Verg.
G. i 487 (of the portents at Caesar's death), non alias caelo ceciderunt
plura sereno | fulgura. Cf. Galb. 4, 2.
feriat: sc. Iuppiter; cf. Luc. ii 60 (an appeal to Jove), utrasque simul
partesque ducesque
feri: Sen. N.Q. ii 46, quare Iuppiter aut ferienda
transit aut innoxia ferit?
tactum de caelo: cf. Calig. 57, 2, futurae caedis (i.e. the murder of
Caligula) multa prodigia extiterunt Capitolium Capuae de caelo tactum
est, item Romae cella Palatini atriensis; Claud. 46 (among the praesagia
of the death of Claudius), tactum de caelo monumentum Drusi patris:
Galb. 1 (in Nero's last days), tacta de caelo Caesarum aede, capita
omnibus statuis simul deciderunt, Augustique sceptrum e manibus excussum
est. Other instances of this portent are found in Cic. Div. ii 21, 47;
Liv. xxv 7, xxix 14, etc. Seneca, N.Q. ii 49, gives different classifications
of fulmina with their significance as portents.
Capitolium:
=
templum Iovis Capitolini; both it and the templum
Flaviae gentis had been built by Domitian himself (see c. 5).
Palatina domus: Domitian's magnificent restoration of the Palatina
domus (see on Vesp. 25), completed in 92 A.D., was the work of the
architect Rabirius; cf. Mart. vii 56, 1, Astra polumque pia cepisti mente,
Rabiri, | Parrhasiam (= Palatinam) mira qui struis arte domum. The part
of the imperial palace on the Palatine which still exists above ground is
mainly due to this reconstruction under Domitian; see Platner-Ashby,
Topogr. Dict. Rome 158 sqq. Ancient writers give no account of the whole
building, but are lavish in their praises of its splendour; e.g. Mart. viii
36, 1, Regia pyramidum, Caesar, miracula ride; | iam tacet Eoum barbara
Memphis opus: | pars quota Parrhasiae labor est Mareoticus (= Aegyptius)
aulae? | Clarius in toto nil videt orbe dies: Stat. S. iv 2, 18, Tectum
augustum, ingens, non centum insigne columnis, | sed quantae superos
caelumque Atlante remisso | sustentare queant. Stupet hoc vicina
Tonantis | regia teque pari laetantur sede locatum | numina. Cf. also
Plut. Poplic. 15, Philostrat. vit. Apollon. vii 32.
basi: see on Vesp. 23, 3.
statuae triumphalis: probably the colossal equestrian statue (described
in Stat. S. i 1) which was decreed to Domitian by the senate and people
for his victories over the Chatti and Dacians (c. 6, 1).
titulus: this inscription was not carved on the marble base of the
statue, but must have been on a plate of bronze fastened to it. Among
the omens prophetic of the death of Augustus was the blotting out by a
thunderbolt of the letter C from the name Caesar in the inscription on
one of his statues, the haruspices declaring that this foretold that he
would live 100 (C = centum) days and would then become a god, as the
word aesar in Etruscan denoted a god (Aug. 97, 2).
arbor: the cypress-tree which earlier had fallen and risen erect again
as an omen of Vespasian's rise to power (Vesp. 5, 4).
Praenestina Fortuna: at Praeneste (Palestrina) 20 miles E. of Rome
there was a famous temple and oracle of Fortuna primigenia (an epithet
explained as meaning the mother of life or the firstborn daughter of
Jove). Cicero (Div. ii 41, 85) tells the tale of the foundation of the oracle.
A Praenestine, Numerius Suffucius, was bidden by a dream to cleave a
rock, and a great number of wooden lots (sortes), inscribed in antique
characters, fell out, while honey flowed from an olive-tree close by. The
haruspices ordained that the olive-tree should be made into a box, in which
the lots were enclosed, and one was drawn by a child when the oracle was
consulted. Cicero says that in his day only the vulgar had resort to it,
but under the Empire it came into favour again. Tiberius tried to do
away with all oracles near Rome, but desisted through fright at the divine
power of the Praenestine lots, for though he had them conveyed in a sealed
chest to Rome, they could not be found till the chest was taken back to
the temple of Fortuna (Tib. 63). The future greatness of Alexander
Severus was foretold by the Praenestine oracle with a sors bearing the
words of Virgil "si qua fata aspera rumpas, | tu Marcellus eris”
(Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 4). For other references to the oracle see Prop. ii
32, 3: Luc. ii 193: Juv. xiv 88: Sil. Ital. viii 365.
annum novum commendanti: on the Kalends of January Domitian
sent gifts to the goddess and made sacrifice at the temple at Praeneste.
In Rome on that day, in accordance with old Republican usage, there was
a solemn votorum nuncupatio pro incolumitate reipublicae on the Capitol,
and on Jan. 3 vows were offered pro incolumitate principis. As the goddess
Fortuna deserted Domitian, so she had deserted Galba when his doom was
approaching; see Galb. 18, 2.
§ 3. Minervam colebat: for the special honours paid by Domitian
to Minerva, whose son he claimed to be, see on c. 4, 4.
somniavit excedere sacrario: Dio (lxvii 16) gives a different version
of the dream: ἄλλα τε αὐτῷ σημεῖα ἐγένετο, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν τῷ ὕπνῳ τόν τε ῾Ρούστικον
(i.e. Junius Rusticus, whom he had put to death, see c. 10, 3) ξίφει προσιέναι
οἱ, καὶ τὴν ᾿Αθηνῶν, ἣν ἐν τῷ κοιτῶνι (cubiculo) ἱδρυμένην εἶχε, τὰ ὅπλα
ἀποβεβληκέναι, καὶ ἐπὶ ἅρματος ἵππων μελάνων ἐς χάσμα ἐσπίπτειν ἔδοξεν.
excedere was the word regularly used of the gods leaving a doomed place;
cf. Tac. H. v 13, Exapertae repente delubri (i.e. the Temple at Jerusalem)
fores, et audita maior humana vox, excedere deos; simul ingens motus
excedentium: Verg. A. ii 351, Excessere omnes, adytis arisque relictis, |
di, quibus imperium hoc steterat.
negantemque: if the reading is sound, Suetonius here combines two
of the constructions which he uses with somniare: the inf. (e.g. Aug. 91, 2,
somniavit queri Capitolinum Iovem) and the pres. ptc. (Galb. 4, 3, somniavit
Fortunam dicentem). He couples the inf. with the passive ptc. (esse
omitted) in Calig. 57, 3, somniavit consistere se in caelo iuxta solium Iovis
impulsumque ab eo dextri pedis pollice et in terras praecipitatum. Roth
and Preud'homme mark a lacuna before negantemque; Stephanus read
negantem; Oudendorp proposed, negantem quoque; P. Thomas would insert
lacrimantem before negantemque.
exarmata. a love: according to the old Greek legend Zeus himself
gave birth to Athena, who sprang fully armed from his head. In Homer
she appears as the protectress of heroes, and in Il. v 736 she is described
as arming herself with the shield (aegis), helmet, and spear of her father
Zeus.
..
perinde quam: this is the only place where Suetonius uses perinde
with quam instead of with ac, atque, ut, ac si, which he has elsewhere.
Tacitus often has perinde . quam, mainly in neg. sentences; see Heraeus
on H. i 30: Draeger, Synt. Tac. 175.
Ascletarionis: this is the reading of all the MSS., but the name is
not found elsewhere. Bentley conjectured Ascleparionis, a correction
suggested also by Kumanudis and approved by Boissevain (on Dio lxvii 16)
who says: "forma ᾿Ασκληταρίων nihili est nec usquam reperitur, ᾿Ασκληπαρίων
redit C.I.A. 3, 3521." Cumont (Catal. codd. astrol. Graec. v p. 205) would
read Asclationis, assuming that the astrologer mentioned by Suetonius is
Asclation, an astrologer cited by Vettius Valens (astrological writer
c. 140 A.D.).
mathematici: see on Vitell. 14, 4. The predictions by astrologers of
Domitian's death are mentioned in c. 14, 1.
delatum: see on Vitell. 14, 4.
hunc sciscitatus est: the acc. with sciscitari (instead of ex or ab)
is first found in Livy; cf. Vitell. 7, 3, Calig. 28.
interfici: Dio (lxvii 16) says that he was sentenced to be burnt
alive, and when this was being done a torrent of rain quenched the pyre:
ἕτερος τέ τις πρότερόν ποτε εἰπὼν αὐτῷ καὶ ὁπότε καὶ ὅπως φθαρήσεται, ἔπειτα
ἐρωτηθεὶς ὁποίῳ αὐτὸς τέλει τοῦ βίου χρήσεται, καὶ ἀποκρινάμενος ὅτι ὑπὸ κυνῶν
ἀναλωθήσεται, ἐκελεύσθη μὲν ζῶν κατακαυθῆναι, καὶ τὸ πῦρ αὐτῷ προσήχθη. ὑετοῦ
δὲ ἐν τούτῳ πολλοῦ καταρρυέντος ἥ τε πυρὰ ἐσβέσθη καὶ ἐκεῖνον κύνες ὀπίσω τὼ
χεῖρε δεδεμένον καὶ ἐπικείμενον ἐπ' αὐτῆς εὑρόντες διεσπάραξαν.
The burning
alive and the quenching of the pyre by rain are reminiscent of the story
of the deliverance of Croesus when Cyrus ordered him to be placed upon
the pyre (Hdt. i 86 sq.).
temeritatem: see on Tit. 5, 3.
sepeliri: though sepelire denoted more especially inhumation (cf. Cic.
Legg. ii 23, where it is opposed to urere), it was also used of performing
the funeral rites by burning; even humare could be used of burning not
of burying, e.g. Nep. Eumen. 13, Antigonus Eumenem mortuum propinquis
suis sepeliendum tradidit: hi militari honestoque funere . humaverunt,
ossaque eius in Cappadociam deportanda curaverunt.
..
deiecto funere: funus is used vaguely here to include the pyre and the
body placed upon it. Servius has three notes explaining the word: (1) on
Aen. iii 62, proprie “funus” est incensum cadaver; (2) on Aen. ii 539,
“funus” est iam ardens cadaver, quod dum portatur “exequias” dicimus,
crematum iam “reliquias,” conditum iam ‘‘sepulcrum”; (3) on Aen. iii 22,
apparatus mortuorum “funus” dici solet: exstructio lignorum “rogus”:
subiectio ignis “pyra”: crematio cadaveris ‘“bustum”: locus “ustrina”:
operis exstructio “sepulcrum”: nomen inscriptum ‘‘monumentum.”
a mimo Latino: Latinus, an archimimus, is named as a powerful delator
under Domitian by the Schol. on Juv. iv 53, on the authority of the historian
Marius Maximus. Juvenal mentions Latinus as a delator (i 36) and as an
actor (mimus) playing the part of an adulterer concealed in a trunk (vi 44).
Martial refers to his acting (i 4, 5: ii 72, 3: iii 86, 3: 61, 11: xiii 3, 2)
and has one whole epigram (ix 28) in which he combines the praises of
Latinus with those of Domitian his "master" and his "god": Dulce
decus scaenae, ludorum fama, Latinus | ille ego sum plausus deliciaeque
tuae, | qui spectatorem potui fecisse Catonem, | solvere qui Curios Fabriciosque graves. | Sed nihil a nostro sumpsit mea vita theatro, | et sola tantum
scaenicus arte feror: | nec poteram gratus domino sine moribus esse; |
interius mentes inspicit ille deus. | Vos me laurigeri parasitum dicite
Phoebi, Roma sui famulum dum sciat esse Iovis (i.e. Domitian). On the
favour enjoyed by actors, especially mimi or pantomimi, in the imperial
household see Friedl. Sitteng. ii¹º 143 sqq. This is the only passage in
which Suetonius uses mimus for the actor (histrio), elsewhere it denotes
the play or farce (see on Oth. 3, 2); archimimus for a principal actor
occurs in Vesp. 19, 2.
fabulas: "gossip"; cf. Aug. 70, 1, cena eius secretior ("private")
in fabulis fuit ("was a subject of gossip'): Juv. i 145, it nova nec tristis
per cunctas fabula cenas: Plin. Ep. viii 18, habes omnes fabulas urbis.
CHAPTER 16.
pridie quam periret: for this constr. see on c. 11, 1.
tubures: Pliny describes these as African apples, more like berries
than apples, of two kinds, one white, the other a deep red. They were
introduced into Italy about 36 A.D., and Martial mentions them as grown
in Italy. Cf. Plin. N.H. xv 47, (māla) peregrina sunt zizypha ("jujubes')
et tubures, quae et ipsa non pridem venere in Italiam, haec ex Africa, illa
ex Syria. Sex. Papinius, quem consulem vidimus, primus utraque attulit,
divi Augusti novissimis temporibus, in castris sata, bacis similiora quam
malis, sed aggeribus praecipua decora, quoniam et in tecta iam silvae
scandunt. Tuberum duo genera: candidum et a colore Syricum dictum:
Mart. xiii 42, Non tibi de Libycis tubures et apyrina (i.e. pomegranates
with soft kernels) ramis, | de Nomentanis sed damus arboribus: xiii 43,
Lecta suburbanis mittuntur apyrina ramis | et vernae ("home-grown'')
tubures. Quid tibi cum Libycis? Harduin explains tubures as nucipersica
"nut-peaches"; Stahr translates it in our passage by "Trüffeln (truffles),
but that would be tubera. The form tubures (not tuberes) is the better
attested in Suetonius, Pliny, and Martial.
luna se in Aquario cruentaret: Domitian was assassinated on Sept. 18,
96 A.D. In that year the moon would enter Aquarius on Sept. 15/16 and leave
it on Sept. 18/19. A red moon usually betokened wind; cf. Arat. Phaen.
784; Verg. Georg. i 431, vento semper rubet aurea Phoebe; Luc. v 549,
ventorumque nota rubuit (luna). Domitian predicted that by reason of his
murder the moon on the morrow would be red with blood. The adjs.
cruentus and sanguineus were used of the heavenly bodies in the sense of
"blood-red," e.g. Sen. N.Q. vii 17, 3, cruenti cometae omen post se futuri
sanguinis ferunt: Verg. Aen. x 273, cometae | sanguinei lugubre rubent:
Ov. Am. ii 1, 23, sanguineae cornua lunae. The ominous significance of the
moon being in Aquarius is perhaps to be deduced from Macrob. Comm. in
Somn. Scip. i 12, Et quia in Leone sunt rudimenta nascendi et quaedam
humanae naturae tirocinia, Aquarius autem adversus Leoni est et illo
oriente mox occidit: ideo, cum sol Aquarium tenet, Manibus parentatur,
utpote in signo quod humanae vitae contrarium vel adversum feratur.
Janssen cites an explanation given by Prof. Van Wageningen: Luna in
Aquario tum erat, cuius tertius decanus est Lunae, cf. Firm. Mat., Math. ii
3: “Aquarii primus decanus Veneris est, secundus Mercurii, tertius
Lunae.'" Decanus autem dicitur in lingua astrologorum qui decem ex
triginta partibus orbis signiferi praeerat. Eadem autem pars Aquarii
arbitrio paret Martis et Saturni stellarum vagarum, cf. Firm. ii 5, 12, qui
dicit etiam “Aquarii dominus est Saturnus.” Hic cum esset omnium
errantium pessimus, iure suspicabatur Domitianus dirum quoddam
exstiturum. Domitian's prediction resembles that of the prophet Joel
(2, 31): “The sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord be come."
at: see on Vesp. 5, 5.
haruspicem: Dio (lxvii 16) gives the name of the soothsayer as
Larginus Proclus, and says that the death-penalty was postponed in order
that it might be inflicted when Domitian had survived the danger; after
Domitian had been slain, the soothsayer was set free and rewarded by
Nerva with 400,000 sesterces: ὁ δὲ δὴ μάλιστα διὰ πάντων ἄξιον θαυμάσαι ἐστί,
Λαργῖνός τις Πρόκλος, δημοσίᾳ προειπὼν ἐν Γερμανίᾳ ὅτι τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ, ἐν ᾗ
ἀπέθανε, τελευτήσει, ἀνεπέμφθη τε ἐς τὴν ῾Ρώμην ὑπὸ τοῦ ἄρχοντος, καὶ ἐσαχθεὶς
πρὸς τὸν Δομιτιανὸν ἔφη καὶ τότε τοῦθ' οὕτως ἕξειν, καὶ καταδικασθεὶς τὴν ἐπὶ
θανάτῳ ἀνεβλήθη τε ὅπως διαφυγόντος αὐτοῦ τὸν κίνδυνον ἀποθάνῃ, κὰν τούτῳ τοῦ
Δομιτιανοῦ σφαγέντος ἐσώθη καὶ δέκα μυριάδας δραχμῶν παρὰ τοῦ Νέρουα ἔλαβεν.
For other predictions of the time of Domitian's death see c. 14, 1.
missum: by the governor of the province, as Dio states.
fulgure: cf. c. 15, 2.
mutationem rerum :
a change of government; cf. Galb. 8, 2, пес
defuerunt qui interpretarentur significari rerum mutationem, etc.: Cic.
Att. viii 3, 4, multi mutationis rerum cupidi: Justin xl 2, quod prodigium
mutationem rerum portendere haruspices responderunt.
§ 2. verrucam: “wart'” (ἀκροχορδών), a word familiar from the proverbial expression in Hor. S. i 3, 74, Qui ne tuberibus propriis offendat
amicum | postulat, ignoscet verrucis illius. Serenus Sammonicus (Poet.
Lat. Min. Baehrens iii 158) describes the nature and treatment of verrucae
(Interdum existit turpi verruca papilla, etc.), and the means of stopping
the flow of blood if they burst (Si rupta inmensos fundet verruca cruores,
etc.).
=
utinam hactenus:
utinam nihil amplius (et gravius) accidat; cf.
Sil. Ital. ix 347, sitque hactenus, oro. The various uses of hactenus are
fully illustrated in Hand Turs. iii 4 sqq. Suetonius has it five times
followed by ut (e.g. Vesp. 13, where see note); he also uses it in Calig. 22, 1,
Hactenus quasi de principe, reliqua ut de monstro narranda sunt ("Thus
far forth as of a prince; now forward relate we must as of a monster"
Holland), and in vit. Ter. 5, 2, Cicero in Limone hactenus ("to this
extent'") laudat (Terentium).
requirenti horas: for the plural cf. Cic. Brut. 54, 200, videt oscitantem
iudicem, loquentem cum altero, nonnumquam etiam circulantem, mittentem
ad horas; Plin. N.H. vii 182 (quoted below): the sing. is used in Hor. S. ii
6, 44, hora quota est?
pro quinta quam metuebat: not merely the day but the very hour
of his death had been predicted to him by the astrologers; see c. 14, 1.
..
..
sexta nuntiata est: from the middle of the 2nd cent. B.C. sundials (solaria) and water-clocks (clepsydrae) were in use at Rome, every
wealthy house having special slaves to announce the hours, from whom
the master asked the time; cf. Plin. N.H. vii 182, obiit Cn. Bebius
Tamphilus cum a puero quaesisset horas: Mart. viii 68, 1, horas quinque
puer nondum tibi nuntiat, et tu | iam conviva mihi, Caeciliane, venis:
Juv. x 215, clamore opus est ut sentiat auris, | quem dicat venisse puer,
quot nuntiet horas: Plin. Ep. iii 1, ubi hora balinei nuntiata est: Sen. de
brev. vit. 12, 6, quos quando lavari debeant, quando natare, quando cenare,
alius admonet: Sidon. Ep. ii 9, nuntium per spatia clepsydrae horarum
incrementa servantem. Marquardt, Privatl.2 256 sqq., 788 sqq.
tertia
corporis curam: the refreshing of the body by the siesta (meridiatio),
which came at the sixth hour, i.e. noon; cf. Martial (iv 8) on the division
of the hours of the day between social duties, business, and recreation:
Prima salutantes atque altera continet hora, | exercet raucos
causidicos; | in quintam varios extendit Roma labores, | sexta quies lassis,
septima finis erit; etc. Stahr translates our passage, “er eben im Begriff
war sich eilig zum Bade zu begeben," and so Rolfe, he was hastening
to the bath," but the meaning is fixed by Dio lxvii 17, ἀναπαύσεσθαι τὸ
μεθημερινόν, ὥσπερ εἰώθει, ἔμελλε.
Parthenius: freedman and chamberlain of Domitian, who gave him
the high privilege of wearing the sword or dagger (pugio, see on Galb. 11)
which was usually granted only to military officers such as the praefectus
praetorio; cf. Dio lxvii 15, ἐπέθεντο δὲ αὐτῷ (i.e. Domitian) καὶ συνεσκευάσαντο τὴν πρᾶξιν Παρθένιός τε ὁ πρόκοιτος (cubicularius) αὐτοῦ, καίπερ οὕτω
τιμώμενος παρ' αὐτοῦ ὡς καὶ ξιφηφορεῖν, κ.τ.λ. The murder of Domitian secured
the throne for Nerva, but the new emperor was unable to protect Parthenius
and his fellow-conspirators when their punishment was demanded by the
praetorians in 97 A.D., and Parthenius was first mutilated and then slain;
[Aur. Vict.] Epit. 12, 8, demptis prius genitalibus et in os coniectis,
iugulavere. He was a patron of Martial and presented him with a toga
(Mart. viii 28, ix 49); Martial asks him to introduce his books to the
emperor's notice (v 6, xi 1, xii 11), and speaks in extravagant terms of
the poetic talents of Parthenius himself: xii 11, Parthenio dic, Musa, tuo
nostroque salutem: | nam quis ab Aonio largius amne bibit? | Cuius
Pimpleo lyra clarior exit ab antro? | Quem plus Pierio de grege Phoebus
amat? He may be the Parthenius "Aug. libertus a cubiculo” mentioned
in C.I.L. vi 8764 (= Dessau 1736).
cubiculo praepositus: even under the Republic the cubicularii, or
grooms of the bedchamber, filled positions of confidence and exercised.
'great influence; Cicero (Att. vi 2, 5) boasts that he as governor of Cilicia
was not approachable for any purpose through his cubicularii. In the
imperial household the cubicularii were a numerous body of slaves or freedmen with a special commissariat and medical service (see Marquardt,
Privatl.2 144). They were divided into a prima statio and a secunda statio,
but it is doubtful whether these relieved each other on duty, or were distinguished by different degrees of access to the emperor's person as Friedlaender suggests. These two classes were subdivided into decuries (see
Dom. 17, 2), and at their head was a supra cubicularios or praepositus
cubiculo (πρόκοιτος, ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ κοιτῶνος), always in close attendance on the
emperor and having his ear more than any other man. One of the duties
of a chamberlain was to supervise the introduction of visitors; so Parthenius
announced to Domitian the arrival of Stephanus.
convertit: = ab corporis cura avertit et alii rei intendit (Baumg.-Cr.).
esse qui magnum afferret: i.e. Stephanus, who pretended that he
had a conspiracy to reveal; see c. 17, 1. Philostratus (vit. Apollon. viii 25)
says that Stephanus in person accosted Domitian as he was returning from
the law-court and asked him for a private audience, as he had something
important to say; Domitian then took him aside privately into the men's
apartment (ἀνδρών) of the palace, where Stephanus stabbed him.
(lxvii 17) simply says that when Domitian left the court for his midday
rest Parthenius removed the blade of the dagger which was always under
the emperor's pillow, and then introduced Stephanus.
Dio
CHAPTER 17.
cunctantibus
adgrederentur: for the indirect question with cunctari
see on c. 2, 3, diu cunctatus an
offerret.
conspiratis: see on Galb. 19, 2. For the names of the principal conspirators see on Dom. 14, 1.
minimi
quando et quo modo, id est, lavantemne an cenantem: Burman and
Baumg.-Cr. would delete id est, while Ernesti would change id est to item,
on the ground that lavantemne an cenantem would correspond rather with
quando et quo loco. If change is necessary, quando ex commodo “when
most conveniently'' might be suggested. According to the MSS. Suetonius
several times uses id est or hoc est in giving an explanation or limiting
more definitely a general expression; e.g. Iul. 19, 2, provinciae
negoti, id est, silvae callesque: Aug. 26, 2 magno, id est, septemdecim
annorum intervallo: Aug. 88, orthographiam, id est, formulam rationemque
scribendi a grammaticis institutam: Vesp. 11, neve filiorum familiarum
faeneratoribus exigendi crediti ius umquam esset: hoc est, ne post patrum
quidem mortem. In all such passages editors are naturally inclined to
regard the words introduced by id est or hoc est as mere glosses. But it
must be remembered that Suetonius was a grammaticus, to whom exposition
would become a second nature.
Stephanus: Philostratus (vit. Apollon. viii 25) says that this freedman
of Domitilla, who had been signified by the portent of a στέφανος (corona)
surrounding and dimming the orb of the sun, brooded on the murder of
Flavius Clemens, or on the wrongs of the Romans generally, and attacked
Domitian in a spirit worthy of the Athenian champions of liberty (such as
Harmodius and Aristogeiton). The fact which Suetonius mentions, that
Stephanus was to be tried for embezzlement, probably influenced him
much more than any general considerations. Dio (lxvii 18) has a remarkable story that Apollonius of Tyana on the very day and at the very
hour when Domitian was murdered assembled the multitude at Ephesus or
elsewhere and exclaimed “καλῶς, Στέφανε, εὖγε, Στέφανε, παῖε τὸν μιαιφόνον.
ἔπληξας, ἔτρωσας, ἀπέκτειναs." Dio avers that this was so, however in-
credible it may seem (κἂν μυριάκις τις ἀπιστήσῃ). Stephanus himself was
slain by those who rushed in to the aid of Domitian and were not privy
to the plot (Dio c. 17).
Domitillae: Flavia Domitilla, a granddaughter of Vespasian (C.I.L.
vi 948, 8942) and niece of Domitian; her mother Flavia Domitilla, sister
of Domitian, died before the accession of Vespasian (see Vesp. 3), and so
in Philostrat. vit. Apollon. viii 25, where the Domitilla of our passage is
spoken of as a sister of Domitian, ἀδελφιδῆν ‘“niece" must be restored
for ἀδελφήν. Domitilla was wedded to Flavius Clemens, who was put to
death by Domitian, and she herself was banished as a Christian (see c. 15,
1, and note). According to Philostratus she was ordered by Domitian
within a few days after her husband's execution “ ἐς ἀνδρὸς φοιτᾶν” (“to
join her husband in death"; Gsell explains "to wed again"). For her
history and a discussion of the improbable theory that one Flavia Domitilla,
wife of Clemens, was banished for political reasons to Pandateria, and
that another Flavia Domitilla, niece of Clemens (Euseb. Hist. Eccl. iii 18),
was banished as a Christian to Pontia see Stein in Pauly-Wissowa, vi '2733;
Gsell, op. cit. 298 sqq.; Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii 81.
interceptarum: “embezzled," in which sense intervertere (e.g. Vitell.
7, 2) is much more common. Suetonius also uses intercipere of literary
plagiarism; Gramm. 5, commentarios, quorum tamen pars maxima intercepta dicitur. In [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, 11 we are told (if the reading is
correct) that it was Clodianus (mentioned below by Suet. as a cornicularius)
who was charged with embezzlement: Coniuravere plerique, impulsoribus
Parthenio procurante cubiculum, et Stephano, et tum ob fraudem interceptae pecuniae supplicium suspectante Clodiano (probably et should be
removed before tum and inserted before Clodiano).
sinisteriore: for the comparative cf. Tib. 6, 4, where sinisterior funalis
equus means the trace-horse on the left side as opp. to the dexterior,
the trace-horse on the right; SO in Claud. 7, dexteriore umero:
Galb. 21, in dexteriore latere eius. Suetonius more frequently uses the
positives dexter and sinister. Earlier instances of dexterior and sinisterior
are found in Varr. L.L. ix 34, Galba in Cic. Fam. x 30, 3, Ον. M. ii 138,
vii 241, xii 303, Cels. iv 1, and other passages collected by Neue-Wagener,
Formenlehre ii³ 187.
lanis fasciisque: the bandages may have been rolled round the wool
to keep it in its place, or lanis fasciisque may be a hendiadys for laneis
fasciis "woollen bandages." For fascia "bandage" cf. Galb. 21: Cic.
Brut. 60, 217, devinctus fasciis et multis medicamentis propter dolorem
artuum delibutus. See also on galbeo in Galb. 3, 1.
dolonem: a certain restoration by Ferrarius for dolum or dolo of the
MSS. A dolo was a sword-cane with a blade in it that might be used as
a stiletto (Hesych., δόλωνες· ξιφίδια ἐν ξύλοις ἀποκεκρυμμένα); cf. Claud. 13, 1
(of assassins lying in wait for Claudius), reperti et equestris ordinis duo in
publico cum dolone ac venatorio cultro praestolantes. As a weapon of war
dolo meant a pole with a short iron point, e.g. Aen. vii 664, pila manu
saevosque gerunt in bella dolones, where Servius comments, "dolo est aut
flagellum intra cuius virgam latet pugio; aut, secundum Varronem, ingens
contus cum ferro brevissimo.”
professus conspirationis indicium: Philostratus (vit. Apollon. viii 25)
says that what Stephanus revealed to Domitian was that Flavius Clemens
(see c. 15, 1) was not dead as the emperor thought, but was still alive in
a place known to Stephanus, and was planning to attack Domitian.
libellum: for libellus used of a written information lodged by an informer (delator) cf. Plin. Ep. vii 27, nihil notabile secutum, nisi forte,
quod non fui reus: futurus, si Domitianus, sub quo haec acciderunt, diutius
vixisset. Nam in scrinio eius datus a Caro de me libellus inventus est.
attonito suffodit inguina: cf. Philostr., l.c., μέγα δ' αὐτοῦ βοήσαντος περὶ
ὧν ἤκουσε, τεταραγμένῳ προσπεσὼν ὁ Στέφανος καὶ τὸ ξίφος τῆς ἐσκευασμένης
χειρὸς ἀνασπάσας διῆκε τοῦ μηροῦ πρὸς μὲν τὸν αὐτίκα θάνατον οὐ καιρίαν, πρὸς δὲ
τὸν μετὰ ταῦτα οὐκ ἄκαιρον (i.e. the wound was fatal, though not immediately
so): Suidas, δ.υ. Δομετιανόs, says that Domitian was stabbed during his
siesta: Στέφανον
προσπεσόντα Δομετιανῷ καθεύδοντι τὸ μεθημερινὸν πατάξαι
μέν, οὐ μὴν καιρίαν, ἀναπηδήσαντος γοῦν ἐκείνου.
§ 2. Clodianus: cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, 11 (quoted above on interceptarum); he is not mentioned elsewhere.
cornicularius: a title derived from corniculum, a decoration consisting
of one or two small horns fastened to the side of the helmet, conferred on
soldiers for distinguished service; e.g. Liv. x 44, equites omnes ob insignem
multis locis operam corniculis armillisque argenteis donavit.
Suetonius
(Gramm. 9) tells us that the famous "plagosus" Orbilius gained this distinction when serving in Macedonia. From such distinguished soldiers were
chosen the adjutants attached to the principal officers, and cornicularius
is regularly used for an adjutant. Under the Republic one was attached
to the tribunus militum whose turn it was to command (cf. Val. Max. vi 1,
11), and in inscriptions under the Empire we frequently find references to
the cornicularius of the legates legionis, the tribunus militum, the praefectus praetorio, etc. Civil officials, e.g. the praefectus annonae, when
their departments came to be organised in military form, had their cornicularii; see Marquardt, Staatsv. ii² 546. In the Thes. Ling. Lat. our
passage is cited as an instance of cornicularius used de officio civili, but
Clodianus in all probability was attached to one of the praefecti praetorio,
Norbanus and Petronius Secundus, who took part in the conspiracy; see
on c. 14, 1.
Maximus: cf. Dio lxvii 17 (when Domitian was struggling with
Stephanus and had thrown him to the ground), Παρθένιος, δείσας μὴ διαφύγῃ
(ὁ Δομιτιανός), ἐπεισεπήδησεν, ἤ, ὥς γέ τισι δοκεῖ, Μάξιμον ἐξελεύθερον (libertum)
ἐπεισέπεμψε.
Satur: the person denoted by this name (or the variant "Saturius"
read by Roth and Preud'homme) is elsewhere called Sigerus or Sigerius.
Dio mentions Sigerus, a chamberlain (πρόκοιτος), as a prominent conspirator
along with Parthenius (see c. 16, 2), and the two are coupled in Tertull.
Apol. 35, unde qui armati palatium inrumpunt, omnibus tot Sigeriis atque
Partheniis audaciores?; cf. also Mart. iv 78, 8 (addressing a fussy old
fool who is always visiting the Palace and talks of nothing but the
chamberlains): Sigeriosque meros Partheniosque sonas, where Friedlaender
and others prefer the correction Sigerosque, both forms of the name
occurring in inscriptions, “Sigerus" much more frequently.
decurio cubiculariorum: see on c. 16, 2, cubiculo praepositus.
quidam e gladiatorio ludo: this participant in the murder is not
mentioned elsewhere. For the emperor's ludus gladiatorius see on c. 4, 1.
arae: this is Ernesti's correction of curae, and is approved by
*Oudendorp and adopted in their texts by Wolf, Baumg.-Cr., Roth,
Preud 'homme, and Janssen. Burman conjectured cui cura, but this involves
the insertion of et before hoc amplius. C. G. Müller proposed cura, in the
sense of curator. The reading of the MSS., curae assistens, is retained
by Ihm; though it lacks any parallel in Suetonius, it may possibly be
defended by Minuc. Fel. Oct. 26, angelos, id est ministros et nuntios dei
venerationi eius novit adsistere.
...
Larum cubiculi: there was a shrine for the worship of the Lares
either in or attached to the imperial bedchamber; cf. Aug. 7, 1, where we
read of a bronze statuette of the young Augustus presented by Suetonius
himself to the emperor Hadrian (whose secretary he was) and worshipped
by Hadrian among his Lares: puerilem imagunculam Augusti aeream
quae dono a me principi data inter cubiculi Lares colitur. As loyal citizens
associated the Genius of Augustus with the Lares (cf. Hor. C. iv 5, 31),
and included likenesses of the reigning emperor among the "gods of their
family," so we find the emperors themselves introducing among these gods
the images of those whom they specially revered: cf. Capitol. M. Anton.
Philos. 3, tantum honoris magistris suis (i.e. his teachers of philosophy)
detulit, ut imagines eorum aureas in larario haberet: Lamprid. Alex. Sev.
29, matutinis horis in larario suo in quo et divos principes, sed optimos
electos, et animas sanctiores, in quis Apollonium et Christum, Abraham,
et Orpheum et huiuscemodi ceteros habebat, ac maiorum effigies
divinam faciebat: c. 31, Vergilium autem Platonem poetarum vocabat eiusque imaginem cum Ciceronis simulacro in secundo larario habuit ubi et
Achillis et magnorum virorum. Alexandrum vero Magnum inter optimos
et divos in larario maiore consecravit. The word lararium for a shrine of
the Lares is first used by these Scriptores Historiae Augustae; aedicula is
used earlier, e.g. Petron. Satyr. 29, Juv. viii 111. See also Vitell. 2, 5.
rem
hoc amplius narrabat: in the Thes. Ling. Lat. (i 2016) this is given
as an instance of hoc (abl.) amplius = praeterea (see Appendix i. § 6); but
Howard and Jackson (Index Suet.) are much more probably right in
taking hoc as acc. here and in Aug. 27, 2, Iulius Saturninus hoc amplius
tradit.
pugionem pulvino subditum: cf. Oth. 11, 2.
ad caput: sc. lecti, as in Iul. 84, 1, lectus
et ad caput tropaeum.
excepto capulo: only the hilt was left, the blade having been withdrawn by Parthenius; Dio lxvii 17, τοῦ ξίφους, ὁ ἀεί ποτε ὑπὸ τῷ προσκεφαλαίῳ
(pulvino) ἔκειτο, τὸ σιδήριον ὁ Παρθένιος ἐξεῖλεν, ὅπως μὴ χρήσηται.
deducto ad terram: καταβληθεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ (Δομιτιανοῦ) ἔκειτο (Dio, l.c.).
For this use of deducere cf. Stat. Th. viii 851 (of wrestlers), deducit in
aequum
et celsum procurvat Agyllea Tydeus: Petron. Satyr. 127,
implicitum me brachiis
deduxit in terram.
conluctatum diu: the desperate struggling of the wounded Domitian,
until he was finally overcome by numbers, is described with further details
by Philostratus (l.c.): ὁ δ᾽ ἐρρωμένος μὲν καὶ ἄλλως τὸ σῶμα, γεγονὼς δὲ περὶ τὰ
πέντε καὶ τετταράκοντα ἔτη, ξυνεπλάκη τρωθείς, καὶ καταβαλὼν τὸν Στέφανον
ἐπέκειτο, τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ὀρύττων καὶ τὰς παρειὰς ξυντρίβων πυθμένι χρυσῆς κύλικος
αὐτοῦ κειμένης περὶ τὰ ἱερά, ἐκάλει δὲ καὶ τὴν ᾿Αθηνῶν ἀρωγόν. συνέντες οὖν οἱ
δορυφόροι κακῶς πράττοντος ἐσῆλθον ἀθρόοι, καὶ τὸν τύραννον ἀπέκτειναν λιποθυμοῦντα
ἤδη (the δορυφόροι are the praetorian bodyguard of Domitian).
..
...
..
•
dum conatur: the right reading is uncertain: LPOS have tum,
T has cum; conatur is given by r, conatum by the other MSS. Some of
the old editors read conatum and omit dum (Ihm says of this, "nescio an
verius''). Ernesti proposed dum conaretur. If dum
conatur is
correct, it is the only instance in Suetonius of dum with the pres. indic.
in Orat. Obliq. (Bagge and Dalmasso cite as other instances Tib. 14, 4,
cum illum eo ipso momento, dum spatiatur una, praecipitare in mare
destinasset: Tib. 51, 2, et dum adventus sui spem facit, prohibuit consecrari;
but in neither passage is dum really in Orat. Obliq.). Such a constr. with
dum is found once in Cicero, but in verse, Tusc. i 101, Dic, hospes, Spartae
nos te hic vidisse iacentes | dum sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur; in
Sall. Cat. 58, Liv. xxiv 19, Ον. Μ. iv 776; most frequently in Tac. (e.g.
H. i 33, iii 38, v 17; 4. ii 81, xiii 15, xiv 58, xv 59, etc.). Draeger (Hist.
Synt. ii² 605) says that this constr. is avoided by Val. Max., the two Plinies,
Quintil., Suet., Apul., Gell., and the Scriptores Hist. Aug. Suetonius has
the normal subjunctive in Aug. 94, 4, lego Atiam
posita in templo
lectica, dum ceterae matronae dormirent, obdormisse; cf. Calig. 38, 3:
Ner. 35, 5.
quanquam: see on Tit. 7, 2.
oculos effodere: a very common phrase in Plautus, used also in Cic.,
Caes., Virg., etc.; cf. ὀφθαλμοὺς ὀρύττειν οι ἐξορύττειν.
§ 3. xiv Kal. Octb.: i.e. Sept. 18 (96 A.D.).
anno aetatis quadragensimo quinto: his age at death was 44 years,
10 months, 26 days, as Dio (lxvii 18) states precisely: Δομιτιανὸς δὲ ἔζησε
ἔτη τέσσαρα καὶ τεσσαράκοντα καὶ μῆνας δέκα καὶ ἡμέρας ἓξ καὶ εἴκοσιν. He was
born on Oct. 24, 51 A.D. (see c. 1, 1).
imperii quinto decimo: an inaccurate statement, as strictly speaking
he was in the 16th year of his reign; his dies imperii was Sept. 14, 81 A.D.
(the day after the death of Titus, see Tit. 11) when the senate gave to him
the imperium, the title of "Augustus," and the tribunicia potestas, and
so he had reigned 15 years and 5 days, as Dio correctly calculates:
ἐμονάρχησε δὲ ἔτη πεντεκαίδεκα καὶ ἡμέρας πέντε. Eutropius (vii 23, 6) repeats
the incorrect statement of Suetonius, but Aurelius Victor (Caes. 11, 7)
says: poenas luit quinto et quadragesimo vitae anno, dominationis circiter
quinto decimo.
sandapila: the rude bier on which the bodies of the poor were borne
to burial (the rich being borne on a lectus or lectica funebris); cf. Juv. viii
175, Mart. ii 81, viii 75, 14, ix 2, 12 (in Mart. x 5, 9 it is called Orciniana
sponda). The sandapila was provided with a cheap wooden coffin (capulus)
or shell in which the body was placed; this was spoken of contemptuously
as a "box" (arca), cf. Hor. S. i 8, 8, Luc. viii 736; the arca was not
burned with the body, nor buried with it in cases of interment, but was
used again and again (cf. Val. Max. ii 6, 7). The Schol. on Juv. l.c.
mentions that sandapilae were used for removing slain gladiators from
the amphitheatre; so Aur. Vict. (Caes. 11, 8) says of Domitian: Senatus
gladiatoris more funus ferri (al. efferri), radendumque nomen decrevit.
vispillones: Eutrop. vii 23, 6, funus eius ingenti dedecore per vespillones
exportatum, et ignobiliter est sepultum: Euseb.-Hieron. Chron. p. 163
Schoene, Domitianus occisus in palatio et per vespillones ignobiliter exportatus anno aetatis xxxxv. The vispillones were hireling corpse-bearers who
carried the sandapila (Mart. i 30, 1: 47, 1: ii 61, 3); they were generally
four in number (Mart. viii 75, 9) and were also known as sandapilarii
(Sidon. Apoll. Ep. ii 8). Festus (p. 369 M.) says: vespae et vespillones
dicuntur, qui funerandis corporibus officium gerunt, non a minutis illis
volucribus (wasps, vespae), sed quia vespertino tempore eos efferunt, qui
funebri pompa duci propter inopiam nequeunt. Hi etiam vespullae vocantur.
The form vispillo (not ves-) is supported by the MSS. of Martial and
Suetonius.
exportatum: efferre (ἐξάγειν, ἐκκομίζειν) was the regular word for carrying
out to burial; for exportare cf. Verg. G. iv 255 (of bees), tum corpora
luce carentum | exportant tectis et tristia funera ducunt.
Phyllis: Dio lxvii 18, αὐτοῦ τὸ σῶμα Φυλλὶς ἡ τροφὸς κλέψασα ἔθαψεν.
She is not mentioned elsewhere.
Latina via: this road issued from the Porta Capena along with the
Via Appia, and diverging to the left from it, ran more inland, passing
through the Alban hills and touching Ferentinum, Aquinum, and Casinum,
ending at Casilinum in Campania, where it rejoined the Via Appia. Juvenal
refers to the tombs which lined it and the other great roads leading out
of Rome: i 170, experiar quid concedatur in illos, | quorum Flaminia
tegitur cinis atque Latina; v 55, clivosae veheris dum per monumenta
Latinae.
reliquias intulit: a like regard for the ashes of Nero was shown
by his two nurses: Ner. 50, reliquias Egloge et Alexandria nutrices cum
Acte concubina gentili Domitiorum monumento condiderunt.
templo Flaviae gentis: see c. 1, 1 (also c. 5 and c. 15, 2).
Iuliae: daughter of Titus by his second wife Marcia Furnilla (Tit. 4,
2). Domitian's illicit passion for Julia, which led to her death, is described
in c. 22.
CHAPTER 18.
statura fuit procera: see on Galb. 21.
vultu modesto: cf. Tac. H. iv 40, Quo die senatum ingressus est
Domitianus, de absentia patris fratrisque ac iuventa sua (he was aged 18)
pauca et modica disseruit, decorus habitu (“graceful in mien'"); et ignotis
adhuc moribus creba oris confusio pro modestia accipiebatur.
ruborisque pleno: Tacitus (Agr. 45) says that Domitian used this
natural flush as a screen against shame, in that it prevented him showing
the blush of shame: saevus ille vultus et rubor quo se contra pudorem
muniebat; so Pliny, Pan. 48, inveighs against Domitian's “superbia in
fronte, ira in oculis, femineus pallor in corpore, in ore impudentia multo
rubore suffusa.” Blushing was regarded as a sign of gentle breeding;
cf. Plin. Ep. i 14, Est illi (i.e. Acilianus) facies liberalis multo sanguine
multo rubore suffusa, "His countenance is that of a gentleman, the blood
coming readily to his cheeks, which are not seldom suffused with a blush"
20
(Lewis). Seneca, Ep. 11, discourses on blushing and in particular on the
blush of modesty (verecundia) which he describes as “bonum in adulescente
signum''; some men are most dangerous when they redden: quidam (e.g.
Sulla) numquam magis quam cum erubuerint, timendi sunt, quasi omnem
verecundiam effuderint; Pompey was remarkable for extreme mollitia oris;
he blushed in the presence of any gathering. Cf. also Juv. x 300, vultumque modesto | sanguine ferventem.
acie hebetiore: cf. Ner. 51, oculis
hebetioribus. hebes (opp. to
acutus, acer) was used of dim sight; cf. ἀμβλύς, ἀμβλὺ ὁρᾶν, ἀμβλυωπός.
For Suetonius' descriptions of the eyes of the Caesars see on Galb. 21.
decens: the use of decens in the sense of "comely" is poetical (Hor.,
Ov., etc.), and very rare in prose (Plin. Ep. i 21, 2: Quintil. viii 3, 10).
digitos: "toes"; cf. Iul. 61, equo insigni pedibus prope humanis et
in modum digitorum ungulis fissis.
restrictiores: this may mean that the toes were too short or too
bent inward. Pitiscus assumes that Domitian had the claw-like curvature
of the big-toes which disfigured those known as “falcones”; cf. Fest.
p. 88 M., falcones dicuntur, quorum digiti pollices in pedibus intro sunt
curvati, a similitudine falcis.
calvitio deformis: cf. Iul. 45, 2, calvitii deformitas: Apul. Apol. 74,
in pueritia priusquam isto calvitio deformaretur: Petron. Satyr. 108,
deformis praeter spoliati capitis dedecus superciliorum etiam aequalis cum
fronte calvities. Juvenal (iv 37) describes Domitian as the "bald Nero"
in the lines which, according to the Schol. there (differing from the Schol.
on i 1, vii 92, see note on “Paridis” Dom. 3, 1), led to the poet's banishment to Egypt: Cum iam semianimum laceraret Flavius orbem | ultimus
et calvo serviret Roma Neroni; cf. Auson. 257, 12, quem calvum dixit sua
Roma Neronem.
obesitate ventris: cf. Vitell. 17, 2; Ner. 51. Titus also was inclined
to corpulence (Tit. 3, 1).
crurum gracilitate: Nero and Caligula also were spindle-legged: Ner.
51, gracillimis cruribus; Calig. 50, 1, gracilitate maxima cervicis et crurum.
Germanicus, father of Caligula, in his early years had the same defect but
remedied it: Calig. 3, 1, formae minus congruebat gracilitas crurum, sed
ea quoque paulatim repleta assidua equi vectatione post cibum.
remacruerant: the compound remacrescere does not occur elsewhere,
and the prefix re- can only be explained as having an intensive force "to
grow very lean or thin." For a list of similar compounds (e.g. refervescere,
refercire, resciscere) in which re- must be so explained or else regarded as
pleonastic see Roby, Lat. Gramm. § 2103. Bentley and Duker conjectured
emacruerant, Iernstedt longiore macruerant. Marcilius suggested that
gracilitate should be omitted, taking obesitate with crurum as well as with
ventris, and giving to re- the sense of "again." Oudendorp, though preferring emacruerant, explains the reading of the MSS. as meaning “crura
natura quidem gracilia, nihilominus macriora erant facta longa valetudine.”
Bremi takes remacruerant as macruerant.
§2. calvitio ita offendebatur: the sensitiveness of Julius Caesar on the
same subject is well known; Iul. 45, 2, Circa corporis curam morosior, ut
calvitii deformitatem iniquissime ferret, saepe obtrectatorum iocis
obnoxiam expertus. Ideoque et deficientem capillum revocare (“to draw
•
forward'') a vertice adsueverat et ex omnibus decretis sibi a senatu populoque honoribus non aliud aut recepit aut usurpavit libentius quam ius laureae
coronae perpetuo gestandae. Otho had recourse to wearing a wig (Oth.
12, 1.)
..
in contumeliam suam traheret: the usual phrase is in (ad) contumeliam accipere aliquid; in Aug. 68, populus accepit in contumeliam
eius versum, the meaning is that the people took the verse as a reflection
on Augustus. For trahere in the sense of interpreting cf. Tac. H. ii 20,
ornatum ipsius (ducis) in superbiam trahebant: A. iii 22, quod quidam
ad saevitiam trahebant. Friedlaender notices that Martial's repeated jests
1 baldness (e.g. in v 49, a book dedicated to Domitian) are very strange
in the light of what Suetonius says here.
libello de cura capillorum: nothing more is known of this treatise
by Domitian.
Οὐχ ὁράᾳς, κ.τ.λ.: Hom. Il. xxi 108, part of the reply of Achilles
refusing quarter to Priam's suppliant son Lycaon. The preceding line is
the famous κάτθανε καὶ Πάτροκλος, ὅπερ σέο πολλὸν ἀμείνων, and the succeeding
lines are πατρὸς δ᾽ εἴμ᾽ ἀγαθοῖο, θεὰ δέ με γείνατο μητηρ· | ἀλλ᾽ ἔπι τοι καὶ ἐμοὶ
θάνατος καὶ μοῖρα κραταιή.
capillorum fata: cf. the little dirge on Hair (capillorum elegidarion)
recited by Eumolpus in Petron. Satyr. 109: Quod solum formae decus est,
cecidere capilli, | vernantesque comas tristis abegit hiemps. | Nunc umbra
nudata sua iam tempora ("the temples'') maerent, | areaque (i.e. the bald
expanse of the head) attritis ridet adulta (so Bücheler for adusta) pilis. |
O fallax natura deûm: quae prima dedisti | aetati nostrae gaudia prima
rapis. Eumolpus adds an epigram in hendecasyllables on the same
theme: -Infelix, modo crinibus nitebas | Phoebo pulchrior et sorore Phoebi
(i.e. the Sun and Moon). | At nunc levior aere vel rotundo | horti tubere
('mushroom'"), quod creavit unda, | ridentes fugis et times puellas. | Ut
mortem citius venire credas, | scito iam capitis perisse partem.
nec gratius quicquam decore nec brevius: for this commonplace cf.
Sall. Cat. 1, 4, formae gloria fluxa atque fragilis est: Ov. A.A. ii 113,
forma bonum fragile est: Sen. Phaedr. 773, res est forma fugax: Nemes.
Ecl. 4, 24, donum forma breve est.
CHAPTER 19.
laboris impatiens: cf. Dio lxvii 6, τό τε σῶμα ἄπονος, καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν ἄτολμος
ἦν. Pliny (Pan. 14) calls Domitian “iners.” Contrast the activity
of Julius Caesar, Iul. 57, laboris ultra fidem patiens erat.
pedibus non temere ambulavit: for non temere see on Tit. 6, 2.
Pliny (Pan. 24) praises Trajan for differing in this respect from his predecessors (especially Domitian): Incedebas pedibus, incedis: laetabaris
labore, laetaris;
nihil in ipso te fortuna mutavit. Liberum est ingrediente per publicum principe subsistere, occurrere, comitari, praeterire:
ambulas inter nos, non quasi < non > contingas, et copiam tui, non ut
imputes, facis... Ante te principes fastidio nostri et quodam aequalitatis
metu usum pedum amiserant. Illos ergo umeri cervicesque servorum super
ora nostra (vehebant), etc. For the practice of Augustus cf. Aug. 53, 2,
202
In consulatu pedibus fere, extra consulatum saepe adaperta sella per
publicum incessit. Ammianus (xxii 7) says of the emperor Julian:
Humilior princeps. visus est in officio pedibus gradiendo cum honoratis:
quod laudabant alii, quidam ut affectatum et vile carpebant.
in expeditione equo rarius: Trajan on his campaigns led his legions
on foot; cf. Plin. Pan. 14, Cum legiones duceres seu potius (tanta velocitas
erat) raperes, non vehiculum umquam, non equum respexisti. Julius Caesar
generally marched with his soldiers; cf. Iul. 57, in agmine nonnumquam
equo, saepius pedibus anteibat. Tacitus (H. ii 11) says of Otho: Nec illi
segne aut corruptum luxu iter; sed lorica ferrea usus est et ante signa
pedes ire.
lectica vectus est: the lectica was carried on poles (asseres) by six
or eight lecticarii (Oth. 6, 3, n.: Mart. vi 77, 4: ix 2, 11); the emperor's
lecticarii, who formed part of the familia Augusta, are often mentioned in
inscriptions (C.I.L. vi 8872-8875, etc.).
..
armorum nullo studio tenebatur: arma here are the campestria arma
(Hor. A.P. 379), the weapons used in the soldierly exercises in the Campus
Martius, which are referred to e.g. in Aug. 83, Exercitationes campestres
equorum et armorum statim post civilia bella omisit: Hor. Ep. i 18, 52,
Adde virilia quod speciosius arma | non est qui tractet: scis quo clamore
coronae ('ring of spectators'") proelia sustineas campestria: Ov. Tr. iii
12, 19, Usus equi nunc est, levibus nunc luditur armis. By arma in the
strict sense the Romans meant defensive weapons (the scutum, etc.) and
such offensive weapons as were used at close quarters (especially the
gladius); missile weapons were tela not arma, and we find the iaculum
which was used in the exercitationes campestres (cf. Hor. C. i 8) distinguished from the arma in Ov. A.A. iii 383, Sunt illis celeresque pilae,
iaculumque, trochique, | armaque, et in gyros ire coactus equus. Titus was
“armorum et equitandi peritissimus’(Tit. 3, 2).
sagittarum: the use of the bow was not part of the Roman military
training, the bowmen (sagittarii) being supplied by the auxiliaries, mainly
those from Crete and the Balearic isles. Titus, like Domitian, excelled in
bowmanship, slaying 12 of the defenders of Jerusalem with 12 arrows
(Tit. 5, 2). The emperor Julian was destinandi sagittas mire promptus”
(Aur. Vict. Caes. 42, 23), and Honorius also was skilled with the bow (cf.
Claud. iv Cons. Hon. 527 sqq.).
vel praecipuo: Suetonius is very fond of using the intensive vel with
praecipuus, as though it were a superlative adj. like maximus; cf. Aug.
10, 2, quem vel praecipuum adiutorem speraverat: Aug. 32, 2, vel praecipuam calumniandi materiam: Iul. 21: Aug. 29, 1: Claud. 20, 1: Galb.
16, 1; so with the adv., e.g. Vitell. 13, 1, vel praecipue luxuriae
Ner. 22, 1. There are two instances in Tacitus: Dial. 6, vel praecipua
iucunditas est: A. xii 60, сит Marius et Sulla de eo vel praecipuе
bellarent.
deditus:
feras in Albano secessu conficientem: for the venationes in the
amphitheatre attached to Domitian's arx Albana see c. 4,4. Pliny (Pan. 81)
says that Trajan found relaxation in hunting wild beasts in their native
haunts, whereas the beasts on which Domitian showed his skill had their
spirit broken by captivity (domitas fractasque claustris feras).
figentem: the use of figere in the sense of transfigere (of bowmen,
spearmen, etc.) is found in poetry and post-Aug. prose; e.g. Juv. iv 99.
comminus ursos | figebat Numidas, Albana nudus harena | venator: Tac.
A. ii 17, quidam .. admotis sagittariis per ludibrium figebantur.
scopulo: scopulus is a dim. of scopus (σκοπός), a mark or target. The
dim. is not found elsewhere, and Stephanus read scopo, adopted by many
subsequent editors; Roth rightly restored scopulo, which also appears in
the texts of Preud'homme and Ihm. The Greek σκοπός was not naturalised
as a Lat. word, but occurs in its Gr. form in Cic., e.g. Att. viii 11, sed
neutri σκοπός est ille, ut nos beati simus; also in Macrob. Somn. Scip. 4,
somnii mentem, ipsumque propositum, quem Graeci σκοπὸν vocant, tentemus
aperire. For the great number of diminutives in Suetonius see App. i.
§ 1. d.
•
dispansam palmam: the accusative has to do double duty with
in and praebentis. For the meaning of palma cf. Isid. Diff. 2, 62, ‘‘palma”
manus est dispansis digitis, sicut et arbor dispansis ramis: Orig. 11, 69,
"palma” est manus expansis digitis, sicut contractis “pugnus” (“fist").
Plautus has the forms dispenno, dispessus (Mil. 360, 1406); Lucretius uses
both dispansus (i 306) and dispessus (ii 1126, Munro; iii 988).
direxit: this, not derexit, is the reading of the better MSS. (Q has
derexerit); M has dirigerent in Claud. 20, 3, but derecta in Calig. 46 and
derecto in Calig. 19, 1. In all four passages Ihm adopts the spelling der-,
in accordance with the commonly accepted view that derigo (which is found
in inscriptions and in the oldest Lat. MSS.) is probably the only genuine
ancient form; see Ribbeck Proleg. ad Verg. 401 sqq., Munro on Lucr. vi
823, the Lexica of Caesar by Meusel and by Menge and Preuss, and the
Thes. Ling. Lat.
per intervalla digitorum: cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, Sagittarum tam
doctus fuit ut inter patentes digitos extentae manus viri procul positi
spicula eius transvolarent. Stahr gives a modern parallel to Domitian's
feat:-"Man erzählt Ähnliches von dem bekannten preussischen Prinzen
Louis Ferdinand (der bei Saalfeld blieb), der vielleicht nicht ahnte wer
sein Vorgänger in dieser Art barbarischer Virtuosität war."
CHAPTER 20.
liberalia studia.. neglexit: see on "liberales disciplinas,” Galb. 5, 1.
Suetonius has already mentioned (in c. 2, 2) the interest which Domitian
pretended to take in literature, especially poetry, before he became emperor;
for his essays in poetry and the estimate of his poetic talent by other
writers see the note on that passage.
quanquam: see on Galb. 14, 1.
bibliothecas incendio absumptas: the fire referred to is that which
devastated part of Rome in the reign of Titus (see Tit. 8, 3 and notes).
Among the buildings which Dio mentions as destroyed then was the Porticus
Octaviae and the library contained there (τὰ Ὀκταουίεια οἰκήματα μετὰ τῶν
βιβλίων). Macé (op. cit. p. 222) points out that when Suetonius is speaking
of the Palatine library he uses the sing. bibliotheca, but the pl. when he is
speaking of the library in the Porticus Octaviae (this library probably
occupying more than one wing of the rectangular colonnade), and Macé
concludes that it was only the latter library which was restored by Domitian.
Julius Caesar had planned a library at Rome and had commissioned Varro
to procure the books, but the project was cut short by Caesar's death.
Asinius Pollio, out of the spoils of his Illyrian campaigns, founded the
first public library in the Atrium Libertatis on the Aventine, and Augustus
established two others: (1) the bibliothecae Octavianae in the Porticus
Octaviae (named after the sister of Augustus); (2) that in the colonnade
of the temple of Apollo on the Palatine. There was a library in the Palace
of Tiberius (bibliotheca domus Tiberianae), and Tiberius also built a
library, dedicated to the Muses, in connexion with the temple to the deified
Augustus on the slope of the Palatine facing the Capitol. Vespasian
established a library in his temple to Peace (Vesp. 9, 1; cf. Gell. v 21,
xvi 8). These are the only libraries at Rome which we know of as earlier
than the reign of Domitian.
impensissime: this superlative of impense is not found earlier, nor is
impensissimus which Suetonius uses in Tib. 13, 2, impensissimis precibus.
Other superlative adjs., ptcples., or advs. which appear first (if not
exclusively) in Suet. are enixissime (cf. enixius, Galb. 3, 3), animosissime,
criminosissimus (and -e), inaequalissimus, remississimus, diversissime
(diversissimus is common), excogitatissimus, immoderatissimus. Some are
only found in isolated instances outside Suet., e.g. evidentissime, minacissimus, assiduissimus, sollicitissime, persuasissimum, amarissime, reverentissime, notatissimus. See Freund, De Suetonii usu atque genere dicendi
49 sq.
reparare curasset: Duker proposed reparari, but when Suetonius uses
curare in the sense of getting something done by the agency of others, he
regularly joins with it the gerundive and not the acc. and inf. pass. Here
he is emphasizing the personal interest and trouble which Domitian took
in restoring the library or libraries.
exemplaribus undique petitis: the same means as were adopted by
Vespasian in restoring the bronze records destroyed by the burning of
the Capitol; Vesp. 8, 5, aerearumque tabularum tria milia, quae simul conflagraverant, restituenda suscepit undique investigatis exemplaribus.
Alexandream: Ptolemy Philadelphus (king of Egypt, 285-247 в.с.)
collected throughout Greece and Asia a multitude of volumes which he
deposited at Alexandria, the greater number in the library in the Museum,
and the remainder in the library in the Serapeum or temple of Serapis
(Vesp. 7, 1). The Museum library was burnt during the blockade of
Julius Caesar at Alexandria in 47 B.C., and 400,000 volumes are said to
have perished. This loss was partly made good by the transfer to
Alexandria of the 200,000 volumes from the library of the kings of
Pergamum which Antony presented to Cleopatra (Plut. Ant. 58). The
Serapeum library was destroyed under the emperor Theodosius in 389 A.D.
It is uncertain whether Suetonius used the form Alexandrea or Alexandria
for ᾿Αλεξάνδρεια. In 11 places -ia is the better attested; in 6 (including
this) -ea. Here Roth, Preud'homme, and Ihm read eam, but -iam in
Vesp. 7, 1: Tit. 5, 3.
stilo vel necessario: explained by the following sentence; Domitian
would not take the trouble to learn to compose the ordinary epistulae
orationesque et edicta which the emperor usually drafted. Baumg.-Cr.
takes necessario as the adv., but it seems clearly to be the adj.
commentarios et acta Tiberi: commentarii (ὑπομνήματα) here means the
private memoirs written by Tiberius, which are mentioned in Tib. 61, 1,
commentario quem de vita sua summatim breviterque composuit. Similar
memoirs were written by Augustus (Aug. 85, 1), and by Agrippina, mother
of Nero (Tac. A. iv 53). The expression “commentarii principis (principales)" is often used (e.g. in Tac. H. iv 40) in another sense for the
record or register of the acta of the emperor, these including the official
decisions which he gave in matters referred to him (C.I.L. iii 411), privileges
granted by him (Plin. Ep. x 95, 105), and the accusations ordered by him
or brought before him (Suet. Calig. 15, 4: Tac. A. xiii 43). See Introd.
c. iii; Mommsen, Staatsr. ii³ 906.
orationes et edicta: see note on c. 2, 3. For alieno ingenio cf. Tac.
A. xiii 3 on Nero's aliena facundia supplied by Seneca.
=
sermonis tamen nec inelegantis: nec is generally explained as non,
but this seems quite unsound. In old Lat. there are instances of nec so
used (see Kühner-Stegmann, i 817), but in no other passage of Suetonius
has it this meaning. Alexander (op. cit. p. 13), taking nec here as = non,
cites various passages (e.g. Iul. 78, 2; Calig. 6, 2; Claud. 43; Ner. 26, 1;
34, 4; Oth. 9,3; 12, 2; Dom. 15, 2) in which he says nec carries the
value of non, possibly in all, indubitably in some; but an examination of
these passages shows that in all of them nec is to be taken in the sense
of et non or ne quidem. In our passage some words must have fallen
out before nec inelegantis. Bücheler suggested <nec indiligentis > nec
inelegantis, but more probably the original reading was <nec neglegentis >
nec inelegantis. For neglegens (neclegens) as an epithet of sermo cf.
Quintil. x 7, 28, ne id quidem tacendum
nullum nostrum usquam
neglegentem esse sermonem. What is probably a similar corruption occurs
in Vesp. 15, neque caede laetatus, where see note.
..
dictorum: “clever sayings” “mots”; cf. Suet. Gramm. 23, dicto non
infaceto notatum (Palaemonem) ferunt: Hor. A.P. 273, inurbanum lepido
seponere dicto: Macrob. Sat. ii 1, 14, Cicero in libro epistolarum ad
Cornelium Nepotem secundo sic ait: Itaque nostri, cum omnia, quae dixissemus, dicta essent, quae facete et breviter et acute locuti essemus, ea
proprio nomine appellari dicta voluerunt. One of the works of Julius
Caesar was entitled Dicta Collectanea, a collection of apophthegms (Iul. 56),
referred to in Cic. Fam. ix 16 as volumina ἀποφθεγμάτων. See also note on
diceret in Vesp. 20.
..
"Vellem videtur'': practically the same jeu d'esprit is attributed
to Aristotle, who said to an unprincipled youth who prided himself on his
good looks: “Νεανίσκε, οἷός
δοκεῖς αὐτὸς εἶναι, ἐγὼ γενοίμην· οἷος δὲ τῇ
ἀληθείᾳ ὑπάρχεις, τοιοῦτοι μοι οἱ ἐχθροὶ γένοιντο ” (Stob. Serm. 45.)
τι
دو
Maecius: quite unknown, and the MSS. vary in the spelling: M has
maetius (“corr. ex maecius ut vid.," Ihm), and this is read by
Preud'homme; G has mecius; the others metius. We find mention of
three men who bore the name of "Maecius" under the Flavian emperors:
M. Maecius Celer, sent out by Domitian as legatus of a legion in Syria
(cf. Stat. S. iii 2); L. Maecius Postumus, one of the Fratres Arvales under
Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian; M. Maecius Rufus, proconsul of Bithynia
in 79 A.D. See Dessau, Prosop. Imp. Rom. ii 319 sq. The editors who
read "Metius" or "Mettius" suppose this to be Mettius Pompusianus
(see c. 10, 3: Vesp. 14); a Mettius Rufus was appointed prefect of Egypt
by Domitian (see c. 4, 2).
Other
subrutilum: “reddish,” ὑπόπυρρον; cf. Plin. N.H. x 8, etc.
similar compounds with the same meaning are subrufus, subrubicundus,
subruber, subrubeus. Suetonius also uses subflavus (Aug. 79, 2: Ner. 51);
subdebilis (Vitell. 17, 2).
incanum: ''with a sprinkling of white hairs"; cf. Gloss. Cyrill. “incanus. σπαρτοπόλιος.”
This adj. is only used in poetry and in post-Aug.
prose.
or
perfusam nivem mulso: mulsum (sc. vinum), “honey-wine"
"mead," was best made by mixing some old rough wine, such as Massic
or Falernian, with new Attic honey; cf. Macrob. Sat. vii 12, 9, illud
proverbium quo utuntur gulones: Mulsum quod probe temperes miscendum
esse novo Hymettio et vetulo Falerno. The blend of snow and mead was
suggested to Domitian's mind by the practice of cooling mead and wine
with snow; cf. Plin. Ep. i 15, where Pliny playfully tells a friend who
had disappointed at dinner that he will have to pay for the fare provided,
and among other items for the "mulsum et nix, nam hanc quoque computabis, immo hanc in primis, quae perit in ferculo." To clarify, as well
as to cool, wine it was strained through a cloth covered with snow; cf.
Mart. viii 45, 3: ix 22, 8, Et faciant nigras nostra Falerna nives.
condicionem principum miserrimam: a saying of Hadrian's also; cf.
Vulc. Gall. Αvid. Cass. 2, where Marcus Aurelius, replying to a letter of
Verus warning him against the treasonable designs of Avidius Cassius,
points out that in cases of treason it is inevitable that even those who have
been proved guilty seem to suffer injustice, and then adds: Scis enim ipse
quid avus tuus Hadrianus dixerit: “misera condicio imperatorum, quibus
de adfectata tyrannide nisi occisis non potest credi.” Eius autem
exemplum ponere malui quam Domitiani, qui hoc primus dixisse fertur.
Tyrannorum enim etiam bona dicta non habent tantum auctoritatis quantum
debent. Dio (liv 15), when mentioning those charged with conspiracy
against Augustus, has a similar reflection on the difficulty of knowing
whether such charges are just or unjust: οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν ἀκριβῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα τοῖς
ἔξω αὐτῶν οὖσιν εἰδέναι. πολλὰ γὰρ ὧν ἂν ὁ κρατῶν πρὸς τιμωρίαν, ὡς καὶ
ἐπιβεβουλευμένος, ἤτοι δι᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἢ καὶ διὰ τῆς γερουσίας (senatus) πράξῃ,
ὑποπτεύεται κατ᾿ ἐπήρειαν, κἂν ὅτι μάλιστα δικαιότατα συμβῇ, γεγονέναι.
CHAPTER 21.
quotiens esset: see on Galb. 10, 2.
alea se oblectabat: Pliny (Pan. 82) contrasts the employment of leisure
by Trajan and by emperors like Domitian: Otio prodimur.
An non
plerique principes hoc idem tempus in aleam, stupra, luxum conferebant,
cum seriarum laxamenta curarum vitiorum contentione supplerent? Diceplaying and gambling were forbidden by law at Rome both under the
Republic and under the Empire, an exception being allowed, by law or by
custom, at the Saturnalia. Repressive laws were quite ineffective, and
Juvenal (i 88) describes the intensity of the gambling fever in his day:
Alea quando | hos animos? neque enim loculis ("purse") comitantibus
itur | ad casum tabulae, posita sed luditur arca (“money-chest'"). The
emperors were notorious gamesters; cf. Aug. 70, 2, (Augustus) notatus est
ut aleae indulgens: 71, 1, aleae rumorem (‘ill-repute'") nullo modo expavit,
lusitque simpliciter et palam oblectamenti causa: Calig. 41, 2, ne ex lusu
quidem aleae compendium spernens (Caligula played at dice in his Alban
villa during his sister Drusilla's funeral, Sen. Cons. ad Polyb. 17, 4):
Claud. 5, ex contubernio sordidissimorum hominum super veterem segnitiae
notam ebrietatis quoque et aleae infamiam subiit; Claud. 33, 2 (quoted
along with Ner. 30, 3 in the notes on Vitell. 4, where Suetonius says
that Vitellius won the intimacy of Claudius and of Nero per aleae studium).
etiam profestis diebus: so too Augustus; cf. Aug. 71, 1, lusit praeterquam Decembri mense (i.e. during the Saturnalia, Dec. 17-23) aliis quoque
festis et profestis diebus. For profesti dies cf. Macrob. Sat. i 16, 2, Numa
ut in menses annum ita in dies mensem quemque distribuit, diesque omnes
aut festos, aut profestos, aut intercisos vocavit: festi dis dicati sunt, profesti hominibus ob administrandam rem privatam publicamque concessi,
intercisi deorum hominumque communes sunt.
lavabat de die: for de die see on de nocte in Vesp. 21; it means
"in full day," before the afternoon has begun. The normal time for
the bath was the 8th-9th hour, i.e. about 2-3 p.m.; cf. Cic. Att. xiii 52,
Inde ambulavit (Caesar) in litore. Post horam viii in balneum: Mart. xi
52, 3, octavam (horam) poteris servare; lavabimur una. But we often
read of bathing about the 5th hour, before the prandium; e.g. Plin. Ep. iii
5, 10 (of the elder Pliny), Post solem (i.e. the apricatio) plerumque frigida
lavabatur, deinde gustabat (i.e. took the prandium) dormiebatque minimum:
Epictet. Diss. i 1, 29, ᾿Αλλὰ ἦλθεν ἡ πεμπτή· ταύτῃ δ' εἰώθει γυμνασάμενος
ψυχρολουτρεῖν : Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 30, Egressus balneas multum lactis et
panis sumebat, ova, deinde mulsum; atque his refectus aliquando prandium
inibat, aliquando cibum usque ad cenam differebat: Juv. xi 204, Iam
nunc in balnea salva | fronte licet vadas, quanquam solida hora supersit |
ad sextam. See Marquardt, Privatl.2 269 sqq.
prandebat ad satietatem: the prandium, the meal between the iantaculum (Vitell. 13, 1, n.) and the cena, was usually taken about the sixth
hour; cf. Aug. 78, 1, post cibum meridianum: Claud. 34, 2, meridie dimisso
ad prandium populo. This midday meal or lunch might be of a very light
nature, as in the case of Augustus, Aug. 76, 1, nos in essedo panem et
palmulas ('dates") gustavimus; cf. Sen. Ep. 83, 6, panis siccus et sine
mensa prandium, post quod non sunt lavandae manus: Hor. S. i 6, 127,
pransus non avide quantum interpellet inani | ventre diem durare.
Generally, however, it was of a more substantial kind with cold or hot
meats, fish, vegetables, fruit, and wine; see the passages quoted by
Marquardt, op. cit. 267. Nero, like Domitian, indulged freely at the
prandium; cf. Tac. A. xiv 2, medio die cum id temporis per vinum et
epulas incalesceret; so too Vitellius (Vitell. 13, 1).
non temere: see on Tit. 6, 2.
super cenam: see on Tit. 8, 1. Pliny (Pan. 49), addressing Trajan,
says that Domitian by his gorging at his lonely lunch had turned this
prandium into a solitaria cena; and so when the regular cena was being
served, the sated tyrant was free to spy on and insult his guests: Non
enim ante medium diem distentus solitaria cena spectator adnotatorque
convivis tuis immines nec ieiunis et inanibus plenus ipse et ructans non tam
adponis quam obicis cibos, quos dedigneris attingere, aegreque perpessus
superbam illam convictus simulationem rursus te ad clandestinam ganeam
occultumque luxum refers.
Matianum malum: the Matian apple is mentioned in Plin. N.H. xv 49
as one of those deriving their names from persons; it was probably called
after C. Matius Calvena, whom Pliny (N.H. xii 13) names as the inventor
of the art of clipping arbours: primus C. Matius ex equestri ordine, divi
Augusti amicus, invenit nemora tonsilia intra hos lxxx annos. This
C. Matius was a friend of Julius Caesar (Iul. 52, 2) and of Cicero (Cic.
Fam. xi 27, 28, etc.); he translated the Iliad into Latin verse, and wrote a
complete account of the art and science of cookery in three books (Colum.
xii 4, 44). Palmer (Introd. to Hor. S. ii 4) argues strongly that the Catius
whose precepts on cookery are given by Horace is C. Matius. The Matianum
malum is also mentioned in Colum. v 10, 19: Macrob. Sat. iii 19, 2 (where
the form used is Mattianum): Athen. iii 82 c, ἐγὼ . . μάλιστα τεθαύμακα τὰ
κατὰ τὴν ῾Ρώμην πιπρασκόμενα μῆλα, τὰ Ματτιανὰ καλούμενα, ἅπερ κομίζεσθαι
λέγεται ἀπό τινος κώμης ἱδρυμένης ἐπὶ τῶν πρὸς ᾿Ακυληίᾳ (Aquileia) ῎Αλπεων.
For the use of apples at dessert (mensae secundae) cf. Hor. S. i 3, 6;
Mart. x 48, 18.
modicam potiunculam: Statius (S. v 1, 121 sqq.) flatteringly alludes
to the abstemiousness of Domitian as a model which Priscilla commended
to her husband Abascantus for imitation: fovet anxia curas | coniugis
hortaturque simul flectitque labores, ipsa dapes modicas et sobria pocula
tradit | exemplumque ad erile (i.e. of Domitian, their lord) monet.
ampulla: the ampulla (λήκυθος) was a narrow-necked vessel with globular
body, principally used for holding oil, but also for vinegar, wine, and
drink of any kind. At times the Romans used to drink out of the ampulla
itself; such a drinking-flask is called ampulla potoria in Mart. xiv 110,
and glass ampullae for this purpose are mentioned in Mart. vi 35, 3, At tu
multa diu dicis vitreisque tepentem | ampullis potas semisupinus aquam.
convivabatur: see on Vesp. 19, 1.
non ultra solis occasum: contrast Nero, Ner. 27, 2, epulas a medio die
ad mediam noctem protrahebat.
comissaretur: the comissatio (κῶμος, κωμάζειν) or drinking revel took
place after the cena, sometimes in the same room, sometimes the diners
went on to another house (e.g. Liv. xl 7, 5: Petron. Satyr. 65). With
their anointed locks wreathed with roses the comissatores drank more
Graeco under the presidency of a magister or arbiter bibendi (Cic. Sen. 14,
46: Hor. C. ii 7, 25), and were entertained by the performances of artistes
of various kinds, the revel being often protracted till midnight or later
(cf. Tit. 7, 1). Vitellius was peculiar in making the comissatio his fourth
great meal for the day (Vitell. 13, 1). See Marquardt, op. cit. 331 sqq.
nihil aliud quam deambulabat: this elliptical mode of expression,
in which a verb of general signification like facere must be supplied out
of a verb of special signification, is found in Nepos (Ages. 4, Tissaphernes
nihil aliud quam bellum comparavit), and is frequent from Livy on.
Suetonius is fond of it; e.g. Aug. 83, nihil aliud quam vectabatur et
deambulabat: Vesp. 5, 2, nec illam quicquam aliud quam cachinasse.
Sometimes nihil aliud quam is used quite adverbially ("only” “merely”),
e.g. Liv. ii 63, hostes, nihil aliud quam perfusis vano timore Romanis,
citato agmine abeunt. Similarly nihil (nec quicquam) amplius quam is
found at times with an ellipse of facere, at times = tantum, tantum modo;
e.g. Tit. 9, 1, nihil amplius quam monuit: Aug. 2, 3, ipse Augustus
nihil amplius quam equestri familia ortum se scribit. Such usages are very
rare in Tacitus (A. iv 34, xiii 40, xv 13, H. ii 91). Cicero in a few instances uses nihil aliud nisi in this way, e.g. Sest. 14, nihil aliud nisi
meum nomen causamque sustinuit; usually he has the fuller form of
expression, e.g. Rosc. Am. 108, nihil aliud fecerunt nisi rem detulerunt.
See Kühner-Stegmann, ii 564.
CHAPTER 22.
libidinis nimiae: cf. Dio lxvii 6, ἀσωτότατος καὶ ἀσελγέστατος καὶ πρὸς
γυναῖκας καὶ πρὸς μειράκια ἦν:
Oros. vii 10, 2, libidinis intemperantia quidquid cogitari potest fecit. Suidas describes Domitian as “ἀκρατὴς καὶ
ἀκόλαστος τὰ περὶ τὸ σῶμα, γυναικομανίας καὶ ἀνδρομανίας ἀνάπλεως." For the
genitive of quality cf. Claud. 33, 2, libidinis in feminas profusissimae.
clinopalen: [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 11, 7, furens libidine, cuius foedum
exercitium Graecorum lingua κλινοπάλην vocabat. Martial is probably
referring to Domitian's use of the word κλινοπάλη (lectilucta) when in an
ambiguous epigram (xiv 201) he says of a palaestrita or wrestler: Non amo
quod vincat, sed quod succumbere novit | et didicit melius τὴν ἐπικλινοπάλην.
quasi: see on Tit. 5, 3.
develleret: cf. Galb. 22. Marquardt, Privatl.2 787.
nataretque inter
meretrices: Elagabalus indulged in similar
practices: Lamprid. Heliog. 31, in balneis semper cum mulieribus fuit, ita
ut eas ipse psilothro curaret, etc.
fratris filiam: Julia, daughter of Titus and Marcia Furnilla (Tit. 4, 2);
she was married to Flavius Sabinus, a cousin of Domitian, who was put to
death by the emperor (Dom. 10, 4).
Domitiae: Domitia Longina, whom Domitian married after taking
her away from her husband Aelius Lamia (Dom. 1, 3; 10, 2).
palam dilexit: Philostratus (vit. Apollon. vii 7, quoted on c. 10, 4)
says that Domitian married (ἤγετο) Julia after he had put her husband
Sabinus to death, but there is no other evidence of this. Dio (lxvii 3) states
that after Domitian had sent away his wife Domitia for intriguing with
the actor Paris (see c. 3, 1) he cohabited more openly with Julia as if
she were a wife (τῇ Ἰουλίᾳ ἀπαρακαλυπτότερον ὡς γαμετῇ συνῴκει), and when
he took back Domitia at the request of the people, he none the less kept
up his illicit relations with Julia (ἐχρῆτο δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἧττον τῇ ᾿Ἰουλίᾳ).
causa mortis: cf. Plin. Ep. iv 11, cum ipse (Domitianus) fratris filiam
incesto non polluisset solum, verum etiam occidisset: nam vidua abortu
periit (the use of vidua, "in her widowhood," shows that she was not
married to Domitian). For the date of her death see on Tit. 4, 2.
=
conceptum a se abigere: conceptum may be either from the subst.
conceptus (coner. fetus, cf. Stat. Th. x 805, quosve ego conceptus aut
quae mala pignora fudi?) or the neut. ptc. used substantivally (cf. Scrib.
Larg. Ep. ad Callist. p. 3, ne praegnanti medicamentum, quo conceptum
excutitur, detur). The Thes. Ling. Lat. (iv 23 and 62) is inconsistent on
the point. The words a se (i.e. Domitian) are to be taken with conceptum;
cf. Colum. vi 37, 10, quae (equa) cum ex asino conceptum edidit. The
usual phrase for forcing birth or procuring abortion is partum abigere;
e.g. Cic. Cluent. 32, partum sibi ipsa. medicamentis abegisset. Juvenal
(ii 29 sqq.) denounces Domitian, who had revived the lex Iulia de adulteriis
et stupro, for his treatment of Julia: Qualis erat nuper tragico pollutus
adulter | concubitu (i.e. Domitian's incest was like that of Oedipus in
Greek tragedy), qui tunc leges revocabat amaras | omnibus atque ipsis
Veneri Martique timendas, | cum tot abortivis fecundam Iulia vulvam |
solveret et patruo (i.e. Domitian) similes effunderet offas. Pliny (Pan. 63)
accuses Domitian of stupra and incestae noctes. Claudius, in order to wed
Agrippina, got a decree passed by the senate legitimizing marriage with a
brother's daughter (Claud. 26, Tac. A. xii 7). Gaius (Inst. i 62) mentions
that this was still in force, though marriage with a sister's daughter was
illegal. Constantine restored the ancient law and prohibited marriage with
a brother's daughter as incestuous.
CHAPTER 23.
populus: the ordinary people at Rome had not been affected by the
tyranny of Domitian in the same way as those of higher rank, and moreover the populus under the Empire had come to be absolutely indifferent
to affairs of state; cf. Juv. x 77, populus iam pridem ex quo suffragia
nulli | vendimus, effudit curas; nam qui dabat olim | imperium fasces
legiones omnia, nunc se | continet atque duas tantum res anxius optat, |
panem et circenses.
indifferenter: this post-Aug. adv. is used in the sense of "indiscriminately, by Quintilian (e.g. xi 3, 1, utraque appellatione indifferenter
uti licet) and Gellius (x 24, 8). Suetonius is peculiar in using indifferens
of men in the sense of "careless” “indifferent,” Iul. 53, circa victum
("food") C. Oppius adeo indifferentem (Caesarem) docet; the adj. was
introduced by Cicero (Fin. iii 16) to express the Stoic ἀδιάφορον, i.e.
neutrum, nequè bonum, neque malum.
miles gravissime tulit: for reasons given in Aur. Vict. Caes. 11, 9,
Quo moti milites, quibus privatae commoditates dispendio publico largius
procedunt, auctores necis ad supplicium poscere, more suo, seditiosius
coeperunt. Qui vix aegreque per prudentes cohibiti, tandem in gratiam
optimatum convenere. Neque minus per se moliebantur bellum, quod iis
conversum imperium maestitiae erat, ob omissionem praedarum per dona
munifica. Domitian had lavishly increased the soldiers' pay (c. 7, 3).
According to Philostratus (vit. Soph. i 7) the legions on the Danube were
dissuaded from revolting on Domitian's death by the famous Dio
Chrysostom, who had been forced to flee from Italy by Domitian's decree
expelling the philosophers. He used his great eloquence in inveighing
against the dead tyrant, and persuaded the soldiers that they would do
better to obey the senate.
Divum: Domitian was one of the emperors not deified after death;
for such deification see on Vesp. 23, 4.
nisi duces defuissent: the prefects of the praetorians were themselves involved in the conspiracy against Domitian; see on c. 14, 1.
quod paulo post fecit: under Nerva in 97 A.D. the praetorians, led by
their prefect Casperius Aelianus, wreaked vengeance on the assassins, as is
described in [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 12, 7, Cum interfectores Domitiani ad
exitium poscerentur, tantum est consternatus (Nerva) ut neque vomitum,
neque impetum ventris valuerit differre: et tamen vehementer obstitit,
dictitans aequius esse mori quam auctoritatem imperii foedare, proditis
potentiae sumendae auctoribus. Sed milites, neglecto principe, requisitos,
Petronium uno ictu, Parthenium vero, demptis prius genitalibus et in os
coniectis, iugulavere. They even coerced Nerva into publicly returning
thanks to them for slaying “nefandos pessimosque omnium mortalium.”
Dio (lxviii 3) says that Nerva presented his own throat to their swords in
a vain attempt to save Domitian's assassins who had secured the throne
for him. The soldiers similarly avenged the murder of Alexander Severus;
cf. Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 63, mortem eius milites
gravissime tulerunt
atque auctores caedis trucidarunt (one of the many passages in which the
Scriptores Historiae Augustae imitate Suetonius; see Introd. p. 26).
senatus laetatus est: the senate in the later years of Domitian had
been mere slaves of the despot. Marcellus Eprius, the informer against
Thrasea (c. 10, 3), defended himself on the ground that he was but one
member of a senate who had all been slaves together (se unum esse ex
illo senatu qui simul servierit, Tac. H. iv 8). Tacitus (Agr. 45) vividly
describes the dragooning of the senate by the display of armed force
(obsessam curiam et clausum armis senatum), and the way in which he
and his fellow-senators passed servile decrees of condemnation and even
laid violent hands upon members of their own order; see on c. 11, 3.
Hence the frantic exultation at Domitian's death, which Pliny (Pan. 52)
depicts: Iuvabat illidere solo superbissimos vultus, instare ferro, saevire
securibus, ut si singulos ictus sanguis dolorque sequeretur. Nemo tam
temperans gaudii seraeque laetitiae, quin instar ultionis videretur cernere
laceros artus, truncata membra, postremo truces horrendasque imagines
abiectas excoctasque flammis, ut ex illo terrore et minis in usum hominum
ac voluptates ignibus mutarentur.
repleta certatim curia: as on the death of Titus, but for a very
different purpose; see Tit. 11.
adclamationum: see on adclamari, c. 13, 1. Cf. Lamprid. Comm. 18,
adclamationes senatus post mortem Commodi graves fuerunt. Lampridius
fills two chapters with what purport to be the actual outcries of the senate
on that occasion, the following being a portion: "Hosti patriae honores
detrahantur. Parricida trahatur. Hostis patriae, parricida, gladiator in
spoliario lanietur. Hostis deorum, carnifex senatus, qui senatum occidit,
unco trahatur; qui innocentes occidit, unco trahatur; ... qui sanguini
suo non pepercit, unco trahatur;
Gladiatoris et parricidae statuae
detrahantur." (More of these adclamationes of the senate against the
delatores who flourished under Commodus are quoted on Tit. 8, 4.)
clipeos: shields emblazoned with portraits, medallion busts.
Pliny
(N.H. xxxv 3) says that Appius Claudius, consul in 495 B.C., was the first
to hang such shields with portraits of his ancestors in the temple of Bellona.
Macrobius (Sat. ii 3) tells a story about Cicero's witty remark on a shieldbust of his brother Quintus: Cum in ea provincia quam ille rexerat vidisset
clipeatam imaginem eius ingentibus lineamentis usque ad pectus ex more
pictam (erat autem Quintus ipse staturae parvae), ait: Frater meus dimidius
maior est quam totus. We find constant references to such clipei with
portraits of the emperors which were placed in temples or (as here) in the
senate-house (e.g. Mon. Ancyr. 34: Capitol. Anton. Pius 5: Treb. Poll.
Claud. 3).
In Calig. 16, 4 Suetonius mentions that the senate decreed to
Caligula an aureus clipeus which was borne in solemn state to the Capitol
every year by priests attended by senators, with high-born youths and
maidens chanting his praises. For the clipeus decreed to Germanicus after
his death see Tac. A. ii 83.
imagines: those in the senate-house first of all, and then the other
busts and statues were pulled down, and the statues of gold and silver
(c. 13, 2) were melted; cf. Dio lxviii 1, μίσει δὲ τοῦ Δομιτιανοῦ αἱ εἰκόνες αὐτοῦ,
πολλαὶ μὲν ἀργυραῖ, πολλαὶ δὲ καὶ χρυσαῖ οὖσαι, συνεχωνεύθησαν: Plin. Pan. 52,
illae aureae et innumerabiles (statuae) strage et ruina publico gaudio
litaverunt. The colossal equestrian statue of Domitian, the theme of Stat.
S. i 1, was probably destroyed among the rest (see Vollmer ad loc.).
Procopius (6th cent. A.D.) in his Hist. arcana, 8 p. 55 Dind., has a curious
story that the body of Domitian was hewn in pieces, which were collected
and put together by his wife as a model for a bronze statue. This was
set up on the right of the ascent from the Forum to the Capitol and was
the sole existing statue of Domitian in the time of Procopius, who says
that it bore a strange resemblance to Justinian (Friedl., Sitteng. iii¹º 60).
For the destruction of the statues of the fallen great cf. Juv. x 58, descendunt statuae restemque sequuntur |
iam strident ignes, iam follibus
atque caminis | ardet adoratum populo caput, et crepat ingens | Seianus.
Mayor, in his note there, cites many parallels; among the emperors whose
statues were so treated were Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Commodus, Maximinus,
and Theodosius. In 1878 a mutilated statue, probably of Domitian, was
found in the Tiber.
=
coram: used by Suetonius as adv. (13 times) and prep. (6 times).
As adv., (a) = in conspectu suo, as here and in Vitell. 14, 2, quendam coram
interfici iussit; (b) in conspectu aliorum vel omnium, e.g. Ner. 7, 1,
amitam Lepidam ream testimonio coram afflixit; (c) = in os "to one's
face," e.g. Aug. 13, 2, hunc foedissimo convicio coram prosciderunt. As
a prep. it either precedes or follows its case; e.g. Tib. 62, 2, coram se:
Oth. 1, 2, se coram: Aug. 56, 4, coram iudicibus: Tit. 10, 1, populo coram.
The postposition of coram is not found in class. prose; it occurs most
frequently in Tacitus.
eradendos ubique titulos: cf. Aur. Vict. Caes. 11, 8, senatus
radendum nomen decrevit: Macrob. Sat. i 12, 37, sed ubi infaustum
vocabulum (Domitiani) ex omni aere vel saxo placuit eradi, menses quoque
usurpatione tyrannicae appellationis (see Dom. 13, 3) exuti sunt: Procop.
1.C., δόγμα ἐγεγόνει τῆς συγκλήτου βουλῆς μηδ' ὄνομα τοῦ βασιλέως τούτου ἐν
γράμμασιν εἶναι, μηδ' εἰκόνα ἡντιναοῦν αὐτοῦ διασώζεσθαι: Euseb. Hist. Eccl.
iii 20, μετὰ δὲ τὸν Δομετιανὸν πεντεκαίδεκα ἔτεσιν ἐπικρατήσαντα, Νέρουα τὴν
ἀρχὴν διαδεξαμένου, καθαιρεθῆναι μὲν τὰς Δομετιανοῦ τιμὰς . . ἡ ῾Ῥωμαίων σύγκλητος
βουλὴ ψηφίζεται. Domitian's name has been erased on extant inscriptions;
see the list in Dessau, Inscr. Lat. Sel. iii 1, 273. Commodus (ob. 192) and
Maximinus (ob. 238) were similarly dishonoured; cf. Lamprid. Comm. 20,
Censeo quae is ob honorem suum decerni coegit abolenda: statuas
abolendas, nomenque ex omnibus privatis publicisque monumentis eradendum:
Capitol. Gord. 9, Appellato igitur Gordiano imperatore, iuvenes, qui auctores
huius facinoris erant, statuas Maximini deiecerunt, imagines perfregerunt,
nomen publicitus eraserunt. Mommsen (Staatsr. iii³ 1190) shows that while
the statues of the enemies of the people were overthrown under the
Republic, the first instance of a name being expunged from the list of
magistrates was that of M. Antonius after the battle of Actium. A
proposal in the senate that the name of Piso (see Vitell. 2, 3) should be
removed from the consular records (nomen Pisonis radendum fastis) was
vetoed by Tiberius (Tac. A. iii 17, 18).
abolendam memoriam: cf. Calig. 60 (after the murder of Caligula),
senatus in asserenda libertate adeo consensit, ut quidam abolendam
Caesarum memoriam ac diruenda templa censuerint: Lamprid. Comm. 19,
parricidae gladiatoris (Commodi) memoria aboleatur: Val. Max. viii 14, 5,
bene consuluerant Ephesii decreto memoriam taeterrimi hominis abolendo.
For the senate's damnatio memoriae and rescissio actorum in the case of
a dead emperor see Mommsen, Staatsr. ii 1134. One result of the damnatio
memoriae of Domitian is that comparatively few inscriptions of his reign
have survived. In Rome itself only one has been found (C.I.L. vi 932,
Dessau 246), but a certain number have been preserved in Italy and the
provinces (see Weynand in Pauly-Wissowa, vi 2542; Gsell, op. cit. 331, n. 3;
Imhof, op. cit. 124). From the very considerable number of Domitian's
coins still extant Gsell (330, n. 2) concludes that it is improbable that the
senate ordered the coins with his name to be melted down, as was done
later with those of Geta (Dio lxxvii 12).
..
§ 2. cornix elocuta est: the crow was reputed to possess the gift of
imitating human speech; cf. Varr. L.L. vi 56: Plin. N.H. x 124, cornix
plura contexta verba exprimens et alia atque alia crebro addiscens (from
which it has been proposed to read cornix for perdix in Stat. S. ii 4, 20,
refert iungens iterata vocabula perdix): Ov. M. ii 547, quem garrula motis |
consequitur pennis, scitetur ut omnia, cornix | auditaque viae causa 'non
utile carpis," | inquit, "iter: ne sperne meae praesagia linguae!” Crows
were among the birds which gave omens by their note (oscines); cf. Paulus
(Fest. p. 197), oscinum tripudium est, quod oris cantu significat quid
portendi; cum cecinit corvus, cornix, noctua, parra, picus: Cic. Ac. ii 128,
cum cornix cecinerit, tum aliquid eam aut iubere aut vetare: Cic. Div. ii 78,
nec (Deiotaro) cornix canere potuit recte eum facere.
ἔσται πάντα καλῶς : cf. [Aur. Vict.] Epit. 13, 10 (praising the virtues
of Trajan), Quae omnia eo maiora visebantur, quo per multos atque atroces
tyrannos perdito atque prostrato statu Romano, in remedium tantorum
malorum divinitus credebatur opportune datus; usque eo, ut adveniens
imperium eius pleraque mirifica denuntiaverint, in quis praecipuum, cornicem
e fastigio Capitolii Atticis sermonibus effatam esse “καλῶς ἔσται.”
..
nec defuit qui.. interpretaretur: cf. Galb. 8, 2: Vesp. 5, 3: Tit. 5, 3.
Tarpeio culmine: cf. Calp. Ecl. 7, 24, spectacula Tarpeium prope
despectantia culmen: Sil. Ital. iii 609, Tarpei culminis ignes: vi 102,
culmina
Tarpeia exosus: x 360, ipse refulgebat Tarpeiae culmine rupis.
On the N. summit of the Mons Capitolinus was the Arx; on the S. summit
the Capitolium or temple of Jupiter. The "Tarpeia rupes" was on the
S.W. slope of the S. summit, and that summit was called the Mons Tarpeius,
though Mons Tarpeius, Arx Tarpeia, and Capitolium are sometimes used
to designate the whole hill, which was more correctly described as “Arx
Capitoliumque."
gibbam: "hunch,” “hump"; the fem. form also in Amm. Marc. xxiii
4; gibbus in Juvenal (vi 109: x 294,309). Suetonius uses the adj. gibber
(Galb. 3, 3) and also has gibberosus in a specimen which he cites of the
caustic utterances of Orbilius ("plagosus''): Gramm. 9, 2, Ac ne principum quidem virorum insectatione abstinuit; siquidem ignotus adhuc cum
iudicio frequenti testimonium diceret, interrogatus a Varrone Murena
diversae partis advocato, quidnam ageret et quo artificio ("profession'')
uteretur, gibberosos se de sole in umbram transferre respondit; quod
Murena gibber erat (see note on Galb. 3, 3).
pone: as a prep. also in Tib. 68, 2 (p. occipitium) and Ner. 51 (p.
verticem); as an adv. in Iul. 20, 1 (lictores p. sequerentur). It is most
frequent in Plautus; only twice in Cicero (Tim. 37 and 48); not in Caesar;
twice in Livy; six times in Tacitus. Quintilian (viii 3, 25) mentions it
among the words by which Virgil gave to his work an air of antiquity.
cervicem: Suetonius uses the sing. in 8 passages, the pl. in 4 (e.g.
Vitell. 17, 1, iniecto cervicibus laqueo). Down to the time of Livy the
sing. is limited to poetry. See Krebs-Schmalz, Antibarb. i 248 sq.
auream: 'somnium hoc Domitiani significabat, a tergo eius, hoc est,
post ipsius obitum, futuros principes optimos, qui aetatem auream orbi
terrarum reducerent” (Beroaldus).
abstinentia: cf. c. 9, 1: 10, 1; see on “abstinuit,” Tit. 7, 3.
moderatione insequentium principum: the mild and beneficent rule
of Domitian's successors, Nerva (96-98) and Trajan (98-116), is attested
by various writers; e.g. Philostr. vit. Apollon. vii 8, ἀρχῇ πρέπειν ἐδόκει
Νέρουας, ἧς μετὰ Δομετιανὸν σωφρόνως ἥψατο : Aur. Vict. Caes. 12, 1, Quid
enim Nerva prudentius magisque moderatum? (Epit. 11, 15, quid enim
Nerva prudentius aut moderatius? quid Traiano divinius? quid praestantius
Hadriano?): Eutrop. viii 1, respublica ad prosperrimum statum rediit bonis
principibus ingenti felicitate commissa; Domitiano enim, exitiabili
tyranno, Nerva successit: Tac. H. i 1, rara temporum (i.e. under Nerva
and Trajan) felicitate, ubi sentire quae velis et quae sentias dicere licet:
Tac. Agr. 3, nunc tandem redit animus; et quamquam primo statim beatissimi saeculi ortu Nerva Caesar res olim dissociabiles miscuerit, principatum
ac libertatem, augeatque cotidie felicitatem Nerva Traianus, nec spem
modo ac votum securitas publica, sed ipsius voti fiduciam ac robur adsumpserit, natura tamen infirmitatis humanae tardiora sunt remedia quam mala:
Florus, praef. 8, sub Traiano principe movet lacertos (populus Romanus),
et praeter spem omnium senectus imperii, quasi reddita iuventute, revirescit.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall c. 3, says: “If a man were called to fix the
period in the history of the world during which the condition of the
human race was most happy and prosperous, he would, without hesitation,
name that which elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of
Commodus. The vast extent of the Roman empire was governed by absolute
power, under the guidance of virtue and wisdom. The armies were
restrained by the firm but gentle hand of four successive emperors, whose
characters and authority commanded involuntary respect. The forms of
the civil administration were carefully preserved by Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian,
and the Antonines, who delighted in the image of liberty, and were pleased
with considering themselves as the accountable ministers of the laws. Such
princes deserved the honour of restoring the republic, had the Romans of
their days been capable of enjoying a rational freedom."
APPENDICES.
2R

